
                            Eating for LIFE

                           [Graphic Omitted]

              U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
                         Public Health Service
                     National Institutes of Health

                       National Cancer Institute
               National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
                      NIH Publication No. 88-3000
                               June 1988


Eat for life? Eat to improve your chances long and healthy life? Yes,
you can.

At a time when we seem to be overwhelmed by conflicting diet and health
messages, the National Cancer Institute (NCI) and the National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) have some good news: by making the
right food choices, you may reduce your risk of developing
cardiovascular disease and cancer.

These diseases take the lives of more Americans than all other illnesses
and causes of death combined. Each day, about three out of every four
deaths in the United States will occur as a result of cardiovascular
disease or heart disease (like heart attacks and strokes) and cancer.
This need not be. Although no diet can ensure you won't get a heart
attack, stroke or cancer, what you eat can affect your health. This has
been shown by research of the National Cancer Institute and the National
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (two of this country's National
Institutes of Health), along with the research of other scientists.

How does a person eat for life? It's easier and more enjoyable than you
might think. The practical ideas in this booklet show you how to make
healthful, tasty, and appetizing food choices at home and when you're
eating out. They are consistent with the Dietary Guidelines for
Americans, published by the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. These seven basic guidelines
are:

   * Eat a variety of foods.

   * Maintain desirable weight.

   * Avoid too much fat, saturated fat, and cholesterol.

   * Eat foods with adequate starch and fiber.

   * Avoid too much sugar.

   * Avoid too much sodium.

   * If you drink alcoholic beverages, do so in moderation.

The first two guidelines form the framework of a good diet: eat a
variety of foods so that you get enough of the essential nutrients you
need, and eat only enough calories to maintain desirable weight. The
next five guidelines describe special characteristics of a good
diet-getting adequate starch and fiber and avoiding too much fat, sugar,
sodium, and alcohol. Although the guidelines are designed for healthy
adult Americans, these suggestions are considered especially appropriate
for people who may already have some of the risk factors for chronic
diseases. These risk factors include a family history of obesity,
premature heart disease, diabetes, high blood pressure, or high blood
cholesterol levels.

This pamphlet focuses on five guidelines that are particularly related
to the prevention of heart disease and/or cancer: eat a variety of
foods; maintain desirable weight; avoid too much fat, saturated fat, and
cholesterol; eat foods with adequate starch and fiber; and avoid too
much sodium.

Keep in mind that staying healthy requires more than just good
nutrition. Regular exercise, getting enough rest, learning to cope with
stress, and having regular physical checkups are important ways to help
ensure good health. Checkups are especially important for early
detection of cancer and heart disease. Another important way to reduce
your risks of heart disease and cancer is not to smoke or use tobacco in
any form. Controlling high blood pressure (hypertension) can also
greatly reduce your risk of heart disease and stroke. Remember, three of
the major risk factors for heart disease are largely under your control.
They are smoking, high blood pressure, and high blood cholesterol.


How Do the Foods We Eat Affect Our Chances of Getting Cancer and Heart
Disease?


There is much still to be learned about the relationship between the
foods we eat and our risk of getting cancer and heart disease. The NHLBI
and NCI are conducting a great deal of research to find out more about
this relationship. There is, however, a lot that we know now. The
relationship of diet to cancer and the relationship of diet to risk
factors for heart disease are summarized below:


Obesity


   * We know that obesity is associated with high blood pressure, high
     blood cholesterol, diabetes, heart disease, and stroke, Extreme
     obesity has also been linked to several cancers. This means that if
     you are obese, losing weight may reduce your chances of developing
     these serious diseases or conditions. If you already suffer from
     hypertension and are overweight, weight loss alone can often lower
     your blood pressure to normal levels. Because fat (both saturated
     and unsaturated fat) provides more than twice the number of
     calories provided by equal weights of carbohydrate or protein,
     decreasing the fat in your diet may help you lose weight as well as
     help reduce your risk of cancer and heart disease. Today, most
     Americans get about 37 percent of their daily calories from fat.
     Many experts suggest that fat should be reduced to 30 percent or
     less of calories.


Heart Disease


   * We know that high blood cholesterol increases your risk of heart
     disease, especially as it rises above 200 mg/dl (milligrams of
     cholesterol per deciliter of blood). The evidence is clear that
     elevated cholesterol in the blood, resulting in part from the foods
     we eat and in part from cholesterol made in the body, contributes
     to the development of atherosclerosis, a disorder of arteries that
     results in their narrowing and in reduced blood circulation. This
     condition can lead to a heart attack or stroke.

[Graphic Omitted]

   * We know that blood cholesterol levels are greatly influenced by the
     amount of saturated fat and cholesterol found in many of the foods
     we eat. These raise blood cholesterol levels. (Of the two,
     saturated fat seems to be the major dietary factor which affects
     blood cholesterol.) To reduce your blood cholesterol level, it is
     important to eat less saturated fat and cholesterol. Saturated fat
     and cholesterol are often found together in foods. Saturated fat in
     the U.S. diet is provided primarily by animal products such as the
     fat in meat, butter, whole milk, cream, cheese, and ice cream.
     There are a few vegetable fats--coconut oil, cocoa butter, palm
     kernel and palm oils which are also high in saturated fat.
     Cholesterol is found only in animal products eggs, meat, poultry,
     fish and dairy products. Plant foods such as vegetables, grains,
     cereals, nuts, and seeds do not contain cholesterol. A few foods
     are high in cholesterol but relatively low in fat--for example, egg
     yolks and liver.

Watch out for items in the grocery store that are labeled no cholesterol
or, contains no animal fat." They may still contain a large amount of
fat or saturated fat. Examples are peanut butter, solid vegetable
shortening, nondairy creamer, and baked products like cookies, cakes,
and crackers. For people trying to lose blood cholesterol level, these
foods should be chosen less often.

   * We know that substituting unsaturated fatty acids (which are
     usually liquid and usually come from plant sources) for saturated
     fats can help reduce high blood cholesterol. Safflower, corn,
     soybean, olive, and canola oils are major sources of unsaturated
     fats. The omega-3 fatty acids which are found in fish and seafood,
     may have a favorable effect on blood fat and reduce the risk of
     heart disease. No one is sure yet.

   * We know that there is an association between too much sodium in the
     diet and high blood pressure in some individuals. Sodium is a
     mineral that occurs naturally in some foods and is added to many
     foods and beverages as salt or other additives. Most sodium in the
     American diet comes from salt. One teaspoon of salt contains about
     2 grams of sodium. In countries where people eat only small amounts
     of sodium, high blood pressure is rare. We also know that when some
     people with high blood pressure greatly reduce their sodium intake,
     their blood pressure will fall. Because Americans generally eat
     much more sodium than they need, it is probably best for most
     people to reduce the amount of sodium they eat. According to the
     National Academy of Sciences, a safe and adequate amount of sodium
     in the diet of the average adult is between 1 and 3.3 grams daily.

Some recent studies indicated that the substitution of monosaturated
fats, such as those saturated fats may lower blood cholesterol.


Cancer


   * The National Cancer Institute estimates that about 80 percent of
     all cancers may be related to smoking, diet, and the environment.

   * The National Cancer Institute estimates that about one-third of all
     cancer deaths may be related to the foods we eat. Studies at the
     National Cancer Institute suggest that eating foods high in fiber
     may reduce risks of cancers of the colon and rectum. Adult
     Americans now eat about 11 grams of fiber daily according to NCI
     studies. NCI recommends that Americans increase the daily amount of
     fiber they eat to between 20 and 30 grams, with an upper limit of
     35 grams. The NCI also emphasizes the importance of choosing fiber
     rich foods, not supplements. Good sources of fiber are whole grain
     breads and bran cereals, vegetables, cooked dry peas and beans, and
     fruits.

   * We know that diets high in fats of all kinds have been linked to
     certain cancers, particularly those of the breast, colon, lining of
     the uterus, and prostate gland. Some studies have suggested that
     fat may act as a cancer promoter (an agent that speeds up the
     development of cancer).

   * There is some evidence that diets rich in vitamin A, vitamin C, and
     beta-carotene (the plant form of vitamin A) may help reduce the
     risk of certain cancers. The evidence we have about vitamins A and
     C comes from studies of these vitamins as they are found in foods.
     That is why NCI recommends that you eat a variety of foods rich in
     vitamins rather than relying on vitamin supplements. Good sources
     of vitamin A include yellow-orange vegetables such as carrots,
     winter squash, sweet potatoes and pumpkin; and yellow-orange fruits
     such as peaches, cantaloupes and mangoes. Sources of vitamin C
     include dark-green leafy vegetables such as kale, spinach, and
     watercress; broccoli and asparagus; and tomatoes. Some fruit
     sources of vitamin C are oranges, lemons, grapefruit, peaches,
     berries, and cantaloupe.

[Graphic Omitted]

   * There is some evidence that vegetables in the cabbage family may
     help protect against cancer of the colon. These vegetables are also
     good sources of fiber, vitamins, and minerals. Cabbage family
     vegetables include cabbage, broccoli, cauliflower, Brussels
     sprouts, collards, kale, turnips, mustard greens, turnip greens,
     kohlrabi, watercress and radishes.


Reducing Your Risk of Heart Disease and Cancer


Based on what we know, the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and
the National Cancer Institute have joined together to suggest some ways
you may reduce your risks of heart disease and cancer. These suggestions
emphasize the need to eat a variety of foods each day. They also include
some "mealtime strategies" that you can use to plan meals that avoid too
much fat, saturated fat, cholesterol, and sodium, and that help you to
get adequate starch and fiber. These strategies are consistent with the
Department of Agriculture and Department of Health and Human Services
Dietary Guidelines for Americans. These strategies should encourage you
to think about the foods you eat, how to prepare them, and what food
choices you can make when you go grocery shopping or eat away from home.


The key is following a Choose More Often approach. It doesn't mean
giving up your favorite foods. It means taking steps to choose more
often foods that are low in fat and high in fiber. For example, if you
enjoy eating steak, choose a low-fat cut such as round steak, trim off
the excess fat, broil it, and drain off the drippings. Pizza? To try a
low-fat version that is rich in fiber, use a whole-grain English muffin
or pita bread topped with part-skim mozzarella, fresh vegetables, and
tomato sauce. And cookies or other desserts? In many recipes you can
reduce the fat, and substitute vegetable oils or margarine for butter.
To increase fiber, use whole wheat flour in place of white flour.

Here's how the Choose More Often approach works:

Choose More Often:

     Low-fat meat, poultry, fish

     Lean cuts of meat trimmed of fat (round tip roast, pork tenderloin,
     loin lamb chop), poultry without skin, and fish, cooked without
     breading or fat added.

     Low-fat dairy products

     1 percent or skim milk, buttermilk; low-fat or nonfat yogurt; lower
     fat cheeses (part-skim ricotta, pot, and farmer); ice milk,
     sherbet.

     Dry beans and peas

     All beans, peas and lentils--the dry forms are higher in protein.

     Whole grain products

     Breads, bagels, and English muffins made from whole wheat, rye,
     bran, and corn flour or meal; whole grain or bran cereals; whole
     wheat pasta; brown rice; bulgur.

     Fruits and vegetables

     All fruits and vegetables (except avocados, which are high in fat,
     but that fat is primarily unsaturated). For example, apples, pears,
     cantaloupe, oranges, grapefruit, pineapple, peaches, bananas,
     carrots, broccoli, Brussels sprouts, cabbage, kale, potatoes,
     tomatoes, sweet potatoes, spinach, cauliflower, and turnips, and
     others.

     Fats and oils high in unsaturates

     Unsaturated vegetable oils, such as canola oil, corn oil,
     cottonseed oil, olive oil, and soybean oil, and margarine;
     reduced-calorie mayonnaise and salad dressings.

To assure an adequate diet, choose a variety of foods daily including
selections of vegetables; fruits; whole-grain breads and cereals;
low-fat dairy products; poultry, fish, and lean meat, dry beans and
peas. Here are some tips for following the Choose More Often approach in
three important areas: grocery shopping, food preparation, and eating
out.


Grocery Shopping


Focus on variety. Choose a wide selection of low-fat foods rich in
fiber. Include whole grain breads and cereals, vegetables, fruits,
low-fat dairy products, and poultry, fish, and lean meat. Although the
goal is to reduce fat to 30 percent or less of calories, when choosing
foods that do contain fat, try to choose ones that contain primarily
unsaturated fats. For example, choose an unsaturated-rich margarine
instead of butter; choose vegetable oils.

Read food labels. To help you find foods that are low in fat and
cholesterol and high in fiber, get into the label-reading habit. Many
nutritional labels on packaged foods show the amount of unsaturated and
saturated fatty acids and the amount of cholesterol and fiber they
contain. Check the type of fat on the ingredients list. Is it an animal
fat, coconut or palm kernel oil high in saturated fat? Or, is it corn or
soybean oil high in polyunsaturated fat? Choose a product with the
lowest proportion of saturated fat. The label also tells you something
else about a product. Ingredients are listed in order of amount from
most to least by weight. So, when you buy a breakfast cereal, for
example, choose one that has a whole grain listed first (such as whole
wheat or oatmeal).

Pay attention to sodium. Many processed, canned, and frozen foods are
high in sodium. Cured or processed meats, cheeses, and condiments (soy
sauce, mustard, tartar sauce) are also high in sodium. Check for salt,
onion or garlic salt, and any ingredient with "sodium" on the label. If
the sodium content is given on the nutritional label, compare products
and choose the ones with lower levels.


Food Preparation


Use small amounts of fat and fatty foods. There are lots of ways to use
less fat. For example, when you saute or stir-fry, use only 1/2 teaspoon
of fat per serving. When you use margarine, mayonnaise, or salad
dressing, use half as much as usual. And, decrease portion sizes of
other high fat foods--rich desserts, untrimmed and fatty types of meat,
poultry with skin, and fried foods, especially breaded foods.

[Graphic Omitted]

Use less saturated fat. While reducing your total fat intake, substitute
unsaturated fat and oils for saturated fat in food preparation. For
example, instead of butter, use margarine or vegetable oil. One teaspoon
of butter can be replaced with equal portions (or less) of margarine or
3/4 teaspoon of vegetable oil in many recipes without affecting the
quality. Saturated fat may be reduced even more if you want to
experiment with recipes. Poultry without skin and fish are good choices
because they are often lower in fat and saturated fat than many meats.

Use low-fat alternatives. Substitute 1 percent, skim, or reconstituted
nonfat dry milk for whole milk. Use low-fat yogurt, buttermilk, or
evaporated skim milk in place of cream or sour cream. Try
reduced-calorie mayonnaise and salad dressing in place of regular.

Choose lean meat. When you buy meat, choose lean cuts such as beef
round, pork tenderloin, and loin lamb chops. Be sure to trim all visible
fat from meat and poultry and remove poultry skin.

Use low-fat cooking methods. Bake, steam, broil, microwave, or boil
foods rafter than frying. Skim fat from soups and gravies.

Increase fiber. Choose whole grain breads and cereals. Substitute whole
grain flour for white flour. Eat vegetables and fruits more often and
have generous servings. Whenever possible, eat the edible fiber-rich
skin as well as the rest of the vegetable or fruit.

Use herbs, spices, and other flavorings. For a different way to add
flavor to meals, try lemon juice, basil, chives, allspice, onion, and
garlic in place of fats and sodium. Try new recipes that use less fat or
sodium-containing ingredients, and adjust favorite recipes to reduce fat
and sodium.


Eating Out


Choose the restaurant carefully. Are there low-fat as well as high-fiber
selections on the menu? Is there a salad bar? How are the meat, chicken,
and fish dishes cooked? Can you have menu items broiled or baked without
added fat instead of fried? These are important things to know before
you enter a restaurant--fast food or otherwise. Seafood restaurants
usually offer broiled, baked, or poached fish, and you can often request
butter and sauces on the side. Many steak houses offer small steaks and
have salad bars.

[Graphic Omitted]

Try ethnic cuisines. Italian and Asian restaurants often feature low-fat
dishes. though you must be selective and alert to portion size. Try a
small serving of pasta or fish in a tomato sauce at an Italian
restaurant. Many Chinese, Japanese, and Thai dishes include plenty of
steamed vegetables and a high proportion of vegetables to meat. Steamed
rice, steamed noodle dishes, and vegetarian dishes are good choices too.
Ask that the chef cook your food without soy sauce or salt to decrease
sodium. Some Latin American restaurants feature a variety of fish and
chicken dishes that are low in fat.

Make sure you get what you want. Here are just a few things you can do
to make sure you're in control when you eat out. Ask how dishes are
cooked. Don't hesitate to request that one food be substituted for
another. Order a green salad or baked potato in place of french fries or
order fruit, fruit ice, or sherbet instead of ice cream. Request sauces
and salad dressings on the side and use only a small amount. Ask that
butter not be sent to the table with your rolls. If you're not very
hungry, order two low-fat appetizers rather than an entire meal, split a
menu item with a friend, get a doggie-bag to take half of your meal
home, or order a half-size portion. When you have finished eating, have
the waiter clear the dishes away so that you can avoid postmeal
nibbling.


Mealtime Strategies


We've given you some basic information on fat, fiber, and sodium. And,
we've provided some tips on decreasing fat, saturated fat, cholesterol
and sodium; and increasing fiber. But, how do you put it all together
when it comes to breakfast, lunch, and dinner? These mealtime strategies
should help.


Breakfast


     Strategy #1--Choose fruit more often. Just a few great choices in
                  the fruit family are: cantaloupe, grapefruit,
                  strawberries, oranges, bananas, pears, and apples.

     Strategy #2--Choose whole-grain cereals and products more often.
                  Examples are whole wheat or bran breads, bagels, and
                  cereal.

     Strategy #3--Try making pancakes and waffles with whole wheat flour
                  instead of white flour and one whole egg and one egg
                  white rafter than two whole eggs. For a low-fat
                  topping with fiber, try applesauce, apple butter and
                  cinnamon, or fruit and low-fat plain yogurt.

     Strategy #4--Fruit juice and skim milk are familiar breakfast
                  drinks. For an extra boost in the morning, why not try
                  a fruit smoothie made from juice, fruit and nonfat
                  plain yogurt blended together. Other nonfat choices
                  are seltzer water, coffee, and tea.

These breakfast choices are sound nutrition choices because they are not
only low in fat and cholesterol but also provide fiber, vitamins, and
minerals. Some foods that you should choose less often are sausage,
bacon, butter, whole milk and cream (including commercial nondairy
creamer). These foods are high in saturated fat and cholesterol.

[Graphic Omitted]

Lunch


     Strategy #1--Try a fiber-rich bean, split pea, vegetable, or
                  minestrone soup. Use commercially canned and frozen
                  soups and cream soups less often--they can be high in
                  sodium and fat. If you make your own soup, use broth
                  or skim milk to keep the fat content low.

     Strategy #2--Have a bean salad or mixed greens with plenty of
                  vegetables. For fiber include some vegetables
                  like--carrots, broccoli, cauliflower, and kidney or
                  garbanzo beans. For a low-fat dressing, try lemon
                  juice or a reduced-calorie dressing. If you use
                  regular dressing, use only a very small amount.

     Strategy #3--Try sandwiches made with water-packed tuna, sliced
                  chicken, turkey, lean meat, or low-fat cheese, and use
                  whole-grain bread or pita bread. To decrease fat, use
                  reduced-calorie mayonnaise, or just a small amount of
                  regular mayonnaise, or use mustard. Mustard contains
                  no fat.

     Strategy #4--For dessert, have fresh fruit, low-fat yogurt, or a
                  frozen fruit bar.

     Strategy #5--Fruit juice and skim milk are good beverage choices.
                  Club soda with a twist of lemon or lime, hot or iced
                  tea with lemon, or coffee without cream are refreshing
                  drinks.

[Graphic Omitted]

At lunch, try to eat these foods less often: processed luncheon meats,
fried meat, chicken, or fish; creamy salads, french fries and chips,
richer creamy desserts, high-fat baked goods, and high-fat cheeses such
as Swiss, cheddar, American, and Brie.


Dinner


     Strategy #1--Eat a variety of vegetables. To increase variety, try
                  some that might be new to you, such as those from the
                  cabbage family (broccoli, Brussels sprouts,
                  cauliflower, and cabbage), dark-green leafy vegetables
                  (spinach and kale), and yellow-orange vegetables
                  (winter squash and sweet potatoes). For old favorites,
                  like peas and green beans, skip the butter and
                  sprinkle with lemon juice or herbs. Or, how about a
                  baked potato, with the skin, and topped with low-fat
                  yogurt and chives, tomato salsa, or a small amount of
                  low-fat cheese?

     Strategy #2--Try whole wheat pasta and casseroles made with brown
                  rice, bulgur, and other grains. If you are careful
                  with preparation, these dishes can be excellent
                  sources of fiber and low in fat. For example, when
                  milk and eggs are ingredients in a recipe, try using 1
                  percent or skim milk, reduce the number of egg yolks
                  and replace with egg whites. Here are some ideas for
                  grain-based dishes:

                  -- Whole wheat spaghetti with fresh tomato sauce;

                  -- Whole wheat macaroni and chickpea stew in tomato
                     sauce;

                  -- Tuna noodle casserole, using water-packed tuna (or
                     rinsed, oil-packed tuna), skim milk, and fresh
                     mushrooms or sliced water chestnuts;

                  -- Turkey, broccoli and brown rice casserole using
                     skim milk and egg whites;

                  -- Eggplant lasagna, made with broiled eggplant and
                     part-skim mozzarella or ricotta cheese.

     Strategy #3--Substitute whole-grain breads and rolls for white
                  bread.

     Strategy #4--Choose main dishes that call for fish, chicken, turkey
                  or lean meat. Don't forget to remove the skin and
                  visible fat from poultry and trim the fat from meat.
                  Some good low-fat choices are:

                  -- Red snapper stew;

                  -- Flounder or sole florentine (make the cream sauce
                     with skim milk);

                  -- Salmon loaf (use skim milk, rolled oats, and egg
                     whites);

                  -- Baked white fish with lemon and fennel;

                  -- Chicken cacciatore Italian-style (decrease the oil
                     in the recipe);

                  -- Chicken curry served over steamed wild rice (choose
                     a recipe that requires little or no fat; "saute"
                     the onions in chicken broth instead of butter);

                  -- Light beef stroganoff with well-trimmed beef round
                     steak and buttermilk served over noodles;

                  -- Oriental pork made with lean pork loin, green
                     peppers and pineapple chunks served over rice.

[Graphic Omitted]

     Strategy #5--Choose desserts that give you fiber but little fat
                  such as:

                  -- Baked apples or bananas, sprinkled with cinnamon;

                  -- Fresh fruit cup;

                  -- Brown bread or rice pudding made with skim milk;

                  -- Oatmeal cookies (made with margarine or vegetable
                     oil; add raisins).

For many, the end of the workday, represents a time to relax, and dinner
can be a light meal and an opportunity to decrease fat and cholesterol.


Snacks

     Strategy #1--Try a raw vegetable platter made with a variety of
                  vegetables. Include some good fiber choices: carrots,
                  snow peas, cauliflower, broccoli, green beans.

     Strategy #2--Make sauces and dips with nonfat plain yogurt as the
                  base.

     Strategy #3--Eat more fruit. Oranges, grapefruit, kiwi, apples,
                  pears, bananas, strawberries and cantaloupe are all
                  good fiber sources. Make a big fruit salad and keep it
                  on hand for snacks.

     Strategy #4--Plain, air-popped popcorn is a great low-fat snack
                  with fiber. Watch out! Some prepackaged microwave
                  popcorn has fat added. Remember to go easy on the salt
                  or use other seasonings.

     Strategy #5--Instead of chips, try one of these low-fat
                  alternatives that provide fiber: toasted shredded
                  wheat Squares sprinkled with a small amount of grated
                  Parmesan cheese, whole-grain English muffins, or
                  toasted plain corn tortillas.

     Strategy #6--When you are thirsty, try water, skim milk, juice, or
                  club soda with a twist of lime or lemon.

The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and the National Cancer
Institute are committed to promoting good health and reducing the loss
of life from heart disease and cancer. You can help. By using the ideas
in this booklet, trying recipes that have been modified to decrease fat
and sodium and increase fiber, and planning menus that are high in fiber
and low in fat, especially saturated fat, you may reduce the risk of
these diseases for yourself and for those you love.


So Eat Well, Eat Healthy... And Eat For Life!


For more information on diet, cholesterol, and the prevention of heart
disease, please write for Fads About Blood Cholesterol, at the National
Cholesterol Education Program, National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute, Building 31, Room 4A21, C-200, Bethesda, MD 20892 or call
(301) 951-3260.

For more information on diet, nutrition and the prevention of cancer,
please write for Diet, Nutrition and Cancer Prevention: The Good News,
at the National Cancer Institute, Building 31, Room 10A24, Bethesda, MD
20892, or call 1-8004-CANCER. The booklet lists the amount of fat and
fiber in common foods.

For more information on the seven dietary guidelines, order the Dietary
Guidelines and Your Diet packet (Numbered HG-232-1 through HG-232-7).

These are seven booklets developed by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture. Booklets in the series deal with avoiding too much fat,
saturated fat, and cholesterol, and with eating foods with adequate
fiber and starch and avoiding too much sodium in your diet. Write to:

Superintendent of Documents,
Government Printing Office,
Washington, DC 20402;

include payment of $4.50 and request stock number 001-000-04467-2.

[Graphic Omitted]

