
                What You Need To Know About Skin Cancer

                     National Institutes of Health
                       National Cancer Institute

                           Revised April 1993

[Graphic Omitted]

This booklet is about skin cancer.  You may have questions about this
disease.

Call the Cancer Information Service to talk with someone about skin
cancer.  The staff can talk with you in English or Spanish.

The number is 1-800-422-6237 (1-800-4-CANCER).  The call is free.

Each year, more than 600,000 people in the United States learn that they
have skin cancer.  This National Cancer Institute (NCI) booklet will
give you some important information about this disease.  It explains how
skin cancer is diagnosed and treated and has information about
preventing this disease.

Other NCI booklets are listed on page 22.  Our materials cannot answer
every question you may have about skin cancer.  They cannot take the
place of talks with doctors, nurses, and other members of the health
care team.  We hope our information will help with those talks.

Research has led to better methods of diagnosing and treating this
disease.  It is encouraging to know that skin cancer is now almost 100
percent curable if found early and treated promptly.

Our knowledge about skin cancer and other types of cancer is increasing
rapidly.  For up-to-date information, call the NCI-supported Cancer
Information Service (CIS) toll free at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237).

The Skin

The skin is the body's outer covering.  It protects us against heat and
light, injury, and infection.  It regulates body temperature and stores
water, fat, and vitamin D.  Weighing about 6 pounds, the skin is the
body's largest organ.  It is made up of two main layers: the outer
epidermis and the inner dermis.

The epidermis (outer layer of the skin) is mostly made up of flat,
scale-like cells called squamous cells.  Under the squamous cells are
round cells called basal cells.  The deepest part of the epidermis also
contains melanocytes.  These cells produce melanin, which gives the skin
its color.

The dermis (inner layer of skin) contains blood and lymph vessels, hair
follicles, and glands.  These glands produce sweat, which helps regulate
body temperature, and sebum, an oily substance that helps keep the skin
from drying out.  Sweat and sebum reach the skin's surface through tiny
openings called pores.

[Graphic Omitted]

What Is Cancer?

Cancer is a group of more than 100 diseases.  Although each type of
cancer differs from the others in many ways, every cancer is a disease
of some of the body's cells.

Healthy cells that make up the body's tissues grow, divide, and replace
themselves in an orderly way.  This process keeps the body in good
repair.  Sometimes, however, normal cells lose their ability to limit
and direct their growth.  They divide too rapidly and grow without any
order.  Too much tissue is produced, and tumors begin to form.  Tumors
can be benign or malignant

* Benign tumors are not cancer.  They do not spread to other parts of
  the body and are seldom a threat to life.  Often, benign tumors  can
  be removed by surgery, and they are not likely to return.

* Malignant tumors are cancer.  They can invade and destroy nearby
  healthy tissues and organs.  Cancer cells also can spread, or
  metastasize, to other parts of the body and form new tumors.

Types of Skin Cancer

The two most common kinds of skin cancer are basal cell carcinoma and
squamous cell carcinoma.  (Carcinoma is cancer that begins in the cells
that cover or line an organ.)  Basal cell carcinoma accounts for more
than 90 percent of all skin cancers in the United States.  It is a
slow-growing cancer that seldom spreads to other parts of the body.
Squamous cell cancinoma also rarely spreads, but it does so more often
than basal cell carcinoma.  However,  it is important that skin cancers
are found and treated early because they can invade and destroy nearby
tissue.

Basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma are sometimes called
non-melanoma skin cancer.  Another type of cancer that occurs in the
skin is melanoma, which begins in the melanocytes.  More information
about this disease can be found in the booklet What You Need To Know
About Melanoma.

Cause and Prevention

Skin cancer is the most common type of cancer in the United States.
According to current estimates, 40 to 50 percent of Americans who live
to age 65 will have skin cancer at least once.

Several risk factors increase the chance of getting skin cancer.
Ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the sun is the main cause of skin
cancer.  Artificial sources of UV radiation, such as sunlamps and
tanning booths, can also cause skin cancer.  Although anyone can get
skin cancer, the risk is greatest for people who have fair skin that
freckles easily-often those with red or blond hair and blue or
light-colored eyes.

The risk of developing skin cancer is also affected by where a person
lives.  People who live in areas that get high levels of UV radiation
from the sun are more likely to get skin cancer.   In the United States,
for example, skin cancer is more common in Texas than it is in
Minnesota, where the sun is not as strong.  Worldwide, the highest rates
of skin cancer are found in South Africa and Australia, areas that
receive high amounts of UV radiation.

In addition, skin cancer is related to lifetime exposure to UV
radiation.  Most skin cancers appear after age 50, but the sun's
damaging effects begin at an early age.  Therefore, protection should
start in childhood to prevent skin cancer later in life.

Whenever possible, people should avoid exposure to the midday sun (from
10 a.m. to 2 p.m. standard time, or from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. daylight
saving time).  Keep in mind that protective clothing, such as sun hats
and long sleeves, can block out the sun's harmful rays.  Also, lotions
that contain sunscreens can protect the skin.  Sunscreens are rated in
strength according to a sun protection factor (SPF), which ranges from 2
to 30 or higher.  Those rated 15 to 30 block most of the sun's harmful
rays.

The NCI is supporting research to try to find new ways to prevent skin
cancer.  This research involves people who have a high risk of
developing skin cancer-those who have already had the disease and those
who have certain other rare skin diseases that increase their risk of
skin cancer.

Symptoms

The most common warning sign of skin cancer is a change on the skin,
especially a new growth or a sore that doesn't heal.  Skin cancers don't
all look the same.  For example, the cancer may start as a small,
smooth, shiny, pale,  or waxy lump.  Or it can appear as a firm red
lump.  Sometimes, the lump bleeds or develops a crust.  Skin cancer can
also start as a flat, red spot that is rough, dry, or scaly.

Both basal and squamous cell cancers are found mainly on areas of the
skin that are exposed to the sun-the head, face, neck, hands, and arms.
However, skin cancer can occur anywhere.

Actinic keratosis, which appears as rough, red or brown, scaly patches
on the skin, is known as a precancerous condition because it sometimes
develops into squamous cell cancer.  Like skin cancer, it usually
appears on sun-exposed areas but can be found elsewhere.

Changes in the skin are not sure signs of cancer; however, it is
important to see a doctor if any symptom lasts longer than 2 weeks.
Don't wait for the area to hurt-skin cancers seldom cause pain.

[Graphic Omitted]

Detection and Diagnosis

Detection

The cure rate for skin cancer could be 100 percent if all skin cancers
were brought to a doctor's attention before they had a chance to spread.
Therefore, people should check themselves regularly for new growths or
other changes in the skin.  Any new, colored growths or any changes in
growths that are already present should be reported to the doctor
without delay.

Doctors should also look at the skin during routine physical exams.
People who have already had skin cancer should be sure to have regular
exams so that the doctor can check the skin-both the treated areas and
other places where cancer may develop.

Diagnosis

Basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma are generally diagnosed
and treated in the same way.  When an area of skin does not look normal,
the doctor may remove all or part of the growth.  This is called a
biopsy.  To check for cancer cells, the tissue is examined under a
microscope by a pathologist or a dermatologist.  A biopsy is the only
sure way to tell if the problem is cancer.

Doctors generally divide skin cancer into two stages: local (affecting
only the skin) or metastatic (spreading beyond the skin).  Because skin
cancer rarely spreads, a biopsy often is the only test needed to
determine the stage.  In cases where the growth is very large or has
been present for a long time, the doctor will carefully check the lymph
nodes in the area.  In addition, the patient may need to have additional
tests, such as special x-rays, to find out whether the cancer has spread
to other parts of the body.  Knowing the stage of a skin cancer helps
the doctor plan the best treatment.

Treatment Planning

In treating skin cancer, the doctor's main goal is to remove or destroy
the cancer completely with as small a scar as possible.  To plan the
best treatment for each patient, the doctor considers the location and
size of the cancer, the risk of scarring, and the person's age, general
health, and medical history.

It is sometimes helpful to have the advice of more than one doctor
before starting treatment.  It may take a week or two to arrange for a
second opinion, but this short delay will not reduce the chance that
treatment will be successful.  There are a number of ways to find a
doctor for a second opinion:

* The patient's doctor may be able to suggest a doctor, such as a
  dermatologist or a plastic surgeon, who has a special interest in skin
  cancer.

* The American Academy of Dermatology and the American Society of
  Plastic and Reconstructive Surgeons can provide the names of
  specialists in local areas.

* The Cancer Information Service, at 1-800-4-CANCER, can tell callers
  about treatment facilities, including cancer centers and other
  programs that are supported by the National Cancer Institute.

* Patients can get the names of doctors from their local medical
  society, a nearby hospital, or a medical school.

* The Directory of Medical Specialists lists doctors' names and gives
  their background.  It is in most public libraries.

Treating Skin Cancer

Treatment for skin cancer usually involves some type of surgery.  In
some cases, doctors suggest radiation therapy or chemotherapy. Sometimes
a combination of these methods is used.

Surgery

Many skin cancers can be cut from the skin quickly and easily.  In fact,
the cancer is sometimes completely removed at the time of the biopsy,
and no further treatment is needed.

Curettage and Electrodesiccation

Doctors commonly use a type of surgery called curettage.  After a local
anesthetic numbs the area, the cancer is scooped out with a curette, an
instrument with a sharp, spoon-shaped end.  The area is also treated by
electrodesiccation.  An electric current from a special machine is used
to control bleeding and kill any cancer cells remaining around the edge
of the wound.  Most patients develop a flat, white scar.

Mohs' Surgery

Mohs' technique is a special type of surgery used for skin cancer.  Its
purpose is to remove all of the cancerous tissue and as little of the
healthy tissue as possible.  It is especially helpful when the doctor is
not sure of the shape and depth of the tumor.  In addition, this method
is used to remove large tumors, those in hard-to-treat places, and
cancers that have recurred.  The patient is given a local anesthetic,
and the cancer is shaved off one thin layer at a time.  Each layer is
checked under a microscope until the entire tumor is removed.  The
degree of scarring depends on the location and size of the treated area.
This method should be used only by doctors who are specially trained in
this type of surgery.

Cryosurgery

Extreme cold may be used to treat precancerous skin conditions, such as
actinic keratosis, as well as certain small skin cancers.  In
cryosurgery, liquid nitrogen is applied to the growth to freeze and kill
the abnormal cells.  After the area thaws, the dead tissue falls off.
More than one freezing may be needed to remove the growth completely.
Cryosurgery ususally does not hurt, but patients may have pain and
swelling after the area thaws.  A white scar may form in the treated
area.

Laser Therapy

Laser therapy uses a narrow beam of light to remove or destroy cancer
cells.  This approach is sometimes used for cancers that involve only
the outer layer of skin.

Grafting

Sometimes, especially when a large cancer is removed, a skin graft is
needed to close the wound and reduce the amount of scarring.  For this
procedure, the doctor takes a piece of healthy skin from another part of
the body to replace the skin that was removed.

Radiation

Skin cancer responds well to radiation therapy (also called
radiotherapy), which uses high-energy rays to damage cancer cells and
stop them from growing.  Doctors often use this treatment for cancers
that occur in areas that are hard to treat with surgery.  For example,
radiation therapy might be used for cancers of the eyelid, the tip of
the nose, or the ear.  Several treatments may be needed to destroy all
of the cancer cells.  Radiation therapy may cause a rash or make the
skin in the area dry or red.  Changes in skin color and/or texture may
develop after the treatment is over and may become more noticeable many
years later.

Topical Chemotherapy

Topical chemotherapy is the use of anticancer drugs in a cream or lotion
applied to the skin.  Actinic keratosis can be treated effectively with
the anticancer drug fluorouracil (also called 5-FU).  This treatment is
also useful for cancers limited to the top layer of skin.  The 5-FU is
applied daily for several weeks.  Intense inflammation is common during
treatment, but scars usually do not occur.

Clinical Trials

In clinical trials (research studies with patients), doctors are
studying new treatments for skin cancer.  For example, they are
exploring the value of injecting interferon directly into the tumor.
They are also testing photodynamic therapy, the use of laser light and
drugs that make the cancer cells sensitive to light so the laser can
destroy them.

Followup Care

Even though most skin cancers are cured, people who have been treated
for skin cancer have a higher-than-average risk of developing a new
cancer of the skin.  That's why it's so important for them to continue
to examine themselves regularly, to visit their doctor for regular
checkups, and to follow their doctor's instructions on how to reduce
their risk of developing skin cancer again.

Questions To Ask the Doctor

Skin cancer has a better prognosis, or outcome, than most other types of
cancer; it is curable in over 95 percent of cases.  But any diagnosis of
cancer can be frightening, and it's natural to have concerns about
medical tests, treatments, and doctors' bills.

Patients have many important questions to ask about cancer, and their
doctor is the best person to provide answers.  Most people want to know
exactly what kind of cancer they have, how it can be treated, and how
successful the treatment is likely to be.  The following are some other
questions that patients might want to ask their doctor:

* What types of treatment are available?

* Are their any risks or side effects of treatment?

* Will there be a scar?

* Will I have to change my normal activities?

* How can I protect myself from getting skin cancer again?

* How often are checkups needed?

Some patients become concerned that treatment may change their
appearance, especially if the skin cancer is on their face.  Patients
should discuss this important concern with their doctor.  And they may
want to have a second opinion before treatment.

Skin Cancer Research

Scientists at hospitals and research centers are studying the causes of
skin cancer and looking for new ways to prevent the disease.  They are
also exploring ways to improve treatment.

When laboratory research shows that a new prevention or treatment method
has promise, doctors use it with people in clinical trials.  These
trials are designed to answer scientific questions and to find out
whether the new approach is both safe and effective.  People who take
part in clinical trials make an important contribution to medical
science and may have the first chance to benefit from improved methods.

People interested in taking part in a trial should discuss this option
with their doctor.  What Are Clinical Trials All About? is an NCI
booklet that explains some of the possible benefits and risks of such
studies.

One way to learn about clinical trials is through PDQ, a computerized
resource developed by NCI.  PDQ contains information about cancer
treatment and an up-to-date list of trials all over the country.  The
Cancer Information Service can provide PDQ information to doctors,
patients, and the public.

Medical Terms

Actinic keratosis (ak-TIN-ik ker-a-TO-sis):  A precancerous condition of
thick and scaly patches of skin; also called solar or senile keratosis.

Anesthetic (an-es-THET-ik): A drug that causes loss of sensation or
feeling in a part (local) or all (general) of the body.

Basal cell carcinoma (BAY-sal sel kar-si-NO-ma):  A type of skin cancer
in which the cancer cells resemble the basal cells of the epidermis.

Basal cells:  Small, round cells found in the lower part, or base, of
the epidermis.

Benign (be-NINE):  Not cancerous; does not invade nearby tissue or
spread to other parts of the body.

Biopsy (BY-op-see):  The removal of a sample of tissue that is then
examined under a microscope to check for cancer cells.

Cancer:  A general term for the more than 100 diseases in which cells
grow and divide abnormally.  Cancer cells can spread through the blood
or lymphatic system to other parts of the body.

Carcinogen (kar-SIN-o-jin):  Any agent that is known to cause cancer.

Carcinoma (kar-si-NO-ma):  A type of cancer that begins in the lining or
covering tissues of an organ.

Clinical trials:  Studies conducted with people.  Each study is designed
to answer scientific questions and to find better ways to prevent or
treat cancer.

Cryosurgery (kry-o-SIR-je-ree):   Destruction of tissue by applying
extreme cold.

Curettage (kyoo-re-TAHZH):  Removal of tissue with a curette.

Curette (kyoo-RET):  A spoon-shaped instrument with a sharp edge.

Dermatologist (der-ma-TOL-o-jist):  A doctor who specializes in the
diagnosis and treatment of skin problems.

Dermis (DER-mis):  The lower layer of skin.

Electrodesiccation (e-LEK-tro-des-i-KAY-shun):  Use of an electric
current to destroy cancerous tissue and control bleeding.

Epidermis (ep-i-DER-mis):  The surface layer of skin.

Fluorouracil (floo-ro-YOOR-a-sil):  An anticancer drug.  Its chemical
name is 5-fluorouracil, commonly called 5-U.

Follicles (FAHL-i-kuls):  Shafts through which hair grows.

Interferon (in-ter-FEER-on):  A substance that can improve the body's
natural response to the presence of cancer.  It slows the rate of growth
and division of cancer cells causing them to become sluggish and die.

Kaposi's sarcoma (KAP-o-seez sar-KO-ma):  A relatively rare type of
cancer that develops on the skin of some elderly persons or those with a
weak immune system, including those with acquired immune deficiency
syndrome (AIDS).

Lymph (limf):  The almost colorless fluid that travels through the
lymphatic system and carries cells that help fight infection and
disease.

Lymph nodes:  Small, bean-shaped structures in the lymphatic system. The
lymph nodes store special cells that can trap cancer cells or bacteria
traveling through the body in lymph.

Lymphatic system (lim-FAT-ik):  The tissues and organs that produce,
carry, and store cells that fight infection and disease.  This system
includes the bone marrow, spleen, thymus, lymph vessels, and lymph
nodes.

Malignant (ma-LIG-nant):  Cancerous (see Cancer).

Melanin (MEL-a-nin):  The pigment of the skin.  The amount of this
substance accounts for variations in skin color in different people and
different races.

Melanocytes (me-LAN-o-sites):  Cells that form and contain a pigment
called melanin.

Melanoma (mel-a-NO-ma):  Cancer that begins in the melanocytes. Melanoma
usually starts in the skin, often in a dark mole.  Unlike the more
common skin cancers, melanoma tends to spread to internal organs.

Metastasize (me-TAS-ta-size):  To spread from one part of the body to
another.  When cancer cells metastasize and form secondary tumors, the
cells in the metastatic tumor are like those in the original (primary)
tumor.

Mycosis fungoides (my-KO-sis fun-GOY-deez):  A cancer of the body's
immune, or defense, system.  This cancer, also called T-cell lymphoma,
first appears on the skin.

Nonmelanoma skin cancer:  Skin cancer that does not involve melanocytes.
Basal cell cancer and squamous cell cancer are nonmelanoma skin cancers.

Pathologist (pa-THOL-o-jist):  A doctor who studies cells and tissues
removed from the body, then makes a diagnosis based on changes that
diseases cause in these cells.

Photodynamic therapy (FO-to-die-NAM-ik):  Treatment that destroys cancer
cells with lasers and drugs that become active when exposed to light.

Plastic surgeon:  A surgeon who specializes in minimizing scarring or
disfigurement that may occur as a result of disease (such as skin
cancer), accidents, or birth defects.

Precancerous (pre-KAN-ser-us):  A term used to describe a condition that
may or is likely to become cancer.

Prognosis (prog-NO-sis):  The probable outcome of a disease; the
prospect of recovery.

Radiation therapy (ray-dee-AY-shun):  The use of high-energy rays to
treat disease.  Sources of radiation include x-ray, cobalt, and radium.

Risk factor:  A substance or condition that increases an individual's
chance of getting a particular type of cancer.

Sebum (SEE-bum):  An oily substance produced by the skin.

Skin graft:  Skin that is moved from one part of the body to another.

Squamous cell carcinoma (SKWAY-mus sel kar-si-NO-ma):  A type of skin
cancer in which the cancer cells resemble the squamous cells of the
epidermis.

Squamous cells:  Flat cells that look like fish scales and make up most
of the epidermis.

Stage:  The extent of disease.

Sun protection factor (SPF):  A number on a scale (from 2 upwards) for
rating sunscreens.  Sunscreens with an SPF of 15 to 30 protect the skin
from most of the sun's harmful rays.

Sunscreen:  A substance that blocks the effect of the sun's harmful
rays.  Using lotions that contain sunscreens can reduce the risk of skin
cancer.

Surgery:  An operation.

T-cell lymphoma (lim-FO-ma):  A cancer of the immune system that appears
in the skin; also called mycosis fungoides.

Topical chemotherapy (kee-mo-THER-a-pee):  Treatment with anticancer
drugs in a lotion or cream.

Tumor:  An abnormal mass of tissue that results from excess cell
division.  Tumors perform no useful body function.  They may be either
benign or malignant.

Ultraviolet (UV) radiation (ul-tra-VI-o-let ray-dee-AY-shun):  Invisible
rays that are part of the energy that comes from the sun.  UV radiation
can burn the skin and can cause skin cancer.  UV radiation that reaches
the earth's surface is made up of two types of rays called UVA and UVB
rays.  UVB rays are more likely than UVA rays to cause sunburn, but UVA
rays pass further into the skin.  Scientists have long thought that UVB
radiation can cause skin cancer.  They now think that UVA radiation also
may add to skin damage that can lead to cancer.  For this reason, skin
specialists recommend that people use sunscreens that block both kinds
of UV radiation.

Resources

Information about skin cancer is available from the sources listed
below.  You may wish to check for additional information at your local
library or bookstore and from support groups in your community.

Cancer Information Service (CIS)

The Cancer Information Service, a program of the National Cancer
Institute, is a nationwide telephone service for cancer patients and
their families and friends, the public, and health care professionals.
The staff can answer questions (in English or Spanish) and can send free
National Cancer Institute booklets about cancer.  They also know about
local resources and services.  One toll-free number, 1-800-4-CANCER
(1-800-422-6237), connects callers all over the country with the office
that serves their area.

American Cancer Society (ACS)

The American Cancer Society is a voluntary organization with a national
office (at the above address) and local units all over the country.  It
supports research, conducts educational programs, and offers many
services to patients and their families.  To obtain information about
services and activities in local areas, call the Society's toll-free
number, 1-800-ACS-2345 (1-800-227-2345), or the number listed under
"American Cancer Society" in the white pages of the telephone book.

Skin Cancer Foundation
Suite 2402
245 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY  10016
212-725-5176

This nonprofit organization provides publications and audiovisual
materials on the prevention, early detection, and treatment of skin
cancer.  The Foundation also publishes Sun and Skin News and The Skin
Cancer Foundation Journal, which have nontechnical articles on skin
cancer.  Send a stamped, self-addressed envelope to receive free printed
information.

American Academy of Dermatology
Post Office Box 4014
Schaumburg, IL 60168-4014
708-330-0230

The American Academy of Dermatology is an organization of doctors who
specialize in diagnosing and treating skin problems.  It provides free
booklets on skin cancer and can refer people to dermatologists in their
local area.

American Society of Plastic and
Reconstructive Surgeons
444 East Algonquin Road
Arlington Heights, IL 60005
1-800-635-0635

This Society sends free information about various surgical procedures.
It can also provide the names of board-certified plastic surgeons in a
patient's area.

For Further Information

The National Cancer Institute booklets listed below are available free
of charge by calling 1-800-4-CANCER.

* Facing Forward: A Guide For Cancer Survivors

* Radiation Therapy and You:  A Guide to Self-Help During Treatment

* Taking Time:  Support for People With Cancer and the People Who Care
  About Them

* What Are Clinical Trials All About?

* What You Need To Know About Melanoma

* What You Need To Know About Moles and Dysplastic Nevi

* When Cancer Recurs:  Meeting the Challenge Again

How To Do a Skin Self-Exam

You can improve your chances of finding skin cancer promptly by
performing a simple skin self-exam regularly.

The best time to do this self-exam is after a shower or bath.  You
should check your skin in a well-lighted room using a full-length mirror
and a hand-held mirror.  It's best to begin by learning where your
birthmarks, moles, and blemishes are and what they usually look like.
Check for anything new-a change in the size, texture, or color of a
mole, or a sore that does not heal.

Check all areas, including the back, the scalp, between the buttocks,
and the genital area.

1.  Look at the front and back of your body in the mirror, then raise
    your arms and look at the left and right sides.

2.  Bend your elbows and look carefully at the palms, the forearms,
    including the undersides, and the upper arms.

3.  Examine the back and front of the legs.  Also look between the
    buttocks and around the genital area.

4.  Sit and closely examine the feet, including the soles and the spaces
    between the toes.

5.  Look at your face, neck, and scalp.  You may want to use a comb or a
    blow dryer to move hair so that you can see better.

[Graphic Omitted]

By checking your skin regularly, you will become familiar with what is
normal.  If you find anything unusual, see your doctor right away.
Remember, the earlier skin cancer is found, the better the chance for
cure.

This booklet was written and published by the National Cancer Institute
(NCI), 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892.

The NCI is the U.S. Government's main agency for cancer research and
information about cancer.  The NCI's publications are free.  They may be
copied or reproduced without written permission.
