{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fmodern\fcharset0 CourierNewPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\info
{\author DCI O365}}\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl909\margr909\vieww11900\viewh14940\viewkind1\viewscale75
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs21 \cf0 American Express (AMEX)-|-349012907556604-|-John Smith-|-1812\
American Express (AMEX)-|-349012907556604-|-John Smith -|-1812\
American Express (AMEX)-|-370798060309946-|-John Smith-|-1812\
American Express (AMEX)-|-370798060309946-|-John Smith -|-1812\
American Express (AMEX)-|-379147743045322-|-John Smith-|-1812\
American Express (AMEX)-|-379147743045322-|-John Smith -|-1812\
Diners Club - Carte Blanche-|-30172373184176-|-John Smith-|-1812\
Diners Club - Carte Blanche-|-30175031589512-|-John Smith-|-1812\
Diners Club - Carte Blanche-|-30192738855930-|-John Smith-|-1812\
Diners Club - International-|-36336702837937-|-John Smith-|-1812\
Diners Club - International-|-36438680717782-|-John Smith-|-1812\
Diners Club - International-|-36749134305929-|-John Smith-|-1812\
Diners Club - North America-|-5475619524326909-|-John Smith-|-1812\
Diners Club - North America-|-5500034549243783-|-John Smith-|-1812\
Diners Club - North America-|-5582432775350226-|-John Smith-|-1812\
Discover-|-6011534615918549-|-John Smith-|-1812\
Discover-|-6011873561258751-|-John Smith-|-1812\
Discover-|-6011955673020938-|-John Smith-|-1812\
InstaPayment-|-6376346227360534-|-John Smith-|-1812\
InstaPayment-|-6388418413321681-|-John Smith-|-1812\
InstaPayment-|-6390814777442715-|-John Smith-|-1812\
JCB-|-3088734664034215-|-John Smith-|-1812\
JCB-|-3158130619412397-|-John Smith-|-1812\
JCB-|-3337129398376363-|-John Smith-|-1812\
LASER-|-6706241047721117-|-John Smith-|-1812\
LASER-|-6709065296869773-|-John Smith-|-1812\
LASER-|-6709354866135306-|-John Smith-|-1812\
Maestro-|-5020590718650455-|-John Smith-|-1812\
Maestro-|-5893797657801247-|-John Smith-|-1812\
Maestro-|-6304992215087907-|-John Smith-|-1812\
MasterCard-|-5501682782271827-|-John Smith-|-1812\
MasterCard-|-5515609731384322-|-John Smith-|-1812\
MasterCard-|-5587368062808085-|-John Smith-|-1812\
Visa Electron-|-4026144464279544-|-John Smith-|-1812\
Visa Electron-|-4175008319889311-|-John Smith-|-1812\
Visa Electron-|-4508661618266801-|-John Smith-|-1812\
VISA-|-4485350636714284-|-John Smith-|-1812\
VISA-|-4485364620317657-|-John Smith-|-1812\
VISA-|-4929938943487067-|-John Smith-|-1812\
\
Salsola tragus is an annual herb with glabrous to short stiff hairs. Stems are generally branched and glabrous. Leaves are 8-52 mm in length and are threadlike, becoming rigid. The bracts of inflorescences are subcylindric and spiny. This species is found naturally in more or less saline, littoral habitats along the Mediterranean Sea (Rilke and Reimann 1996). In California, this introduced weed is common in disturbed places below 2700 m. The California Exotic Pest council (1995) included S. tragus as a "List 2" species, indicating that it is a wildland weed of secondary importance because it consists of localized populations in early stages of invasion that lack the ability to dominate native communities. S. tragus is generally considered to be a subspecies of the widespread European halophyte Salsola kali, though the taxonomic relationships between recognized subspecies is complicated by the extreme polymorphism within this group. The characters used in major studies of the taxonomy of this group have included habitat, shape, thickness of leaves and bracts, color, indument, tepal lobes, and wings (Allen 1968). The morphological variation observed within this section of the genus Salsola is possible associated with salinity levels. Teimann and Brecher (1995) and Rilke and Reimann (1996) reported increasing succulence as a consequence of salt treatments in S. tragus. Recent controlled growth studies of all three subspecies of S. kali indicate that while they are ecologically differentiated in Europe, morphological variation in growth form, prickliness, and succulence are obscured by considerable habitat induced and phenological variation. Until recently, S. kali tragus has been differentiated from S.k. iberica by its succulent leaves, glabrous stems and fruits without wings. The results of experiments by Rilke and Reimann (1996) however, invalidate this differentiation, except for the leaf character, and in general, these authors question the status of subspecies within S. kali. Onal (1969) showed in laboratory experiments that accessions of S. kali tragus grew better in moderately saline (0.5% NaCl) water, while Eschel (1985) found that in sand grown plants 1.50 mmol/l NaCl doubled the fresh weight of ssp. tragus. These authors conclude that S. kali tragus is the most salt tolerant subspecies of S. kali (Reimann and Breckle 1995).\
\
In the United States, S. tragus is an important nonmycotropic colonizing species in semiarid lands and may influence the abundance of later seral species (Allen and Knight 1984, Allen 1992). During primary succession on a windy ridge top in Wyoming, grass density was highest where S. kali was most abundant, indicating thatI S. kali plays a facultative role in succession at this site. Facilitation may be due to reduced wind speeds or snow accumulation acting on the grass seedlings. This facilitation effect might become competitive in late summer, and future work is needed to sort out the relative effects of these two processes (Allen and Allen 1988). Previous hypotheses of succession indicated that an increased innoculum density would hasten the rate of succession by making later seral species more competitive with early, seral, nonmycotropic species\
\
Salsola tragus is an annual herb with glabrous to short stiff hairs. Stems are generally branched and glabrous. Leaves are 8-52 mm in length and are threadlike, becoming rigid. The bracts of inflorescences are subcylindric and spiny. This species is found naturally in more or less saline, littoral habitats along the Mediterranean Sea (Rilke and Reimann 1996). In California, this introduced weed is common in disturbed places below 2700 m. The California Exotic Pest council (1995) included S. tragus as a "List 2" species, indicating that it is a wildland weed of secondary importance because it consists of localized populations in early stages of invasion that lack the ability to dominate native communities. S. tragus is generally considered to be a subspecies of the widespread European halophyte Salsola kali, though the taxonomic relationships between recognized subspecies is complicated by the extreme polymorphism within this group. The characters used in major studies of the taxonomy of this group have included habitat, shape, thickness of leaves and bracts, color, indument, tepal lobes, and wings (Allen 1968). The morphological variation observed within this section of the genus Salsola is possible associated with salinity levels. Teimann and Brecher (1995) and Rilke and Reimann (1996) reported increasing succulence as a consequence of salt treatments in S. tragus. Recent controlled growth studies of all three subspecies of S. kali indicate that while they are ecologically differentiated in Europe, morphological variation in growth form, prickliness, and succulence are obscured by considerable habitat induced and phenological variation. Until recently, S. kali tragus has been differentiated from S.k. iberica by its succulent leaves, glabrous stems and fruits without wings. The results of experiments by Rilke and Reimann (1996) however, invalidate this differentiation, except for the leaf character, and in general, these authors question the status of subspecies within S. kali. Onal (1969) showed in laboratory experiments that accessions of S. kali tragus grew better in moderately saline (0.5% NaCl) water, while Eschel (1985) found that in sand grown plants 1.50 mmol/l NaCl doubled the fresh weight of ssp. tragus. These authors conclude that S. kali tragus is the most salt tolerant subspecies of S. kali (Reimann and Breckle 1995).\
\
In the United States, S. tragus is an important nonmycotropic colonizing species in semiarid lands and may influence the abundance of later seral species (Allen and Knight 1984, Allen 1992). During primary succession on a windy ridge top in Wyoming, grass density was highest where S. kali was most abundant, indicating thatI S. kali plays a facultative role in succession at this site. Facilitation may be due to reduced wind speeds or snow accumulation acting on the grass seedlings. This facilitation effect might become competitive in late summer, and future work is needed to sort out the relative effects of these two processes (Allen and Allen 1988). Previous hypotheses of succession indicated that an increased innoculum density would hasten the rate of succession by making later seral species more competitive with early, seral, nonmycotropic species\
\
}