{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Diners Club - International-|-36336702837937-|-John Smith-|-1812\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Diners Club - International-|-36438680717782-|-John Smith-|-1812\
Diners Club - International-|-36749134305929-|-John Smith-|-1812\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi720\partightenfactor0

\f1\fs30 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
The Natural Gas Act (NGA) requires that rates charged for interstate pipeline services be "just and reasonable."   Setting just and reasonable rates requires a balancing of equities between the interests of the pipeline and its ratepayers.  \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi720\partightenfactor0

\f1\fs30 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Under cost-of-service ratemaking, rates are designed based on a pipeline's cost of providing service including an opportunity for the pipeline to earn a reasonable return on its investment.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi720\partightenfactor0

\f1\fs30 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The Commission sets rates for interstate pipeline services in a number of proceedings.   For example, when a pipeline files to increase its rates, it makes a filing with the Commission under Section 4 of the NGA.  These types of filings are referred to as general Section 4 rate cases.  In these proceedings, the Commission reviews all of a pipelines rates and services.  A pipeline can file a general Section 4 rate case anytime it wishes, provided the pipeline did not agree otherwise in a settlement.  A pipeline must demonstrate that the new rates it proposes to charge are just and reasonable.
\fs24 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs22 \cf0 \
\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi720\partightenfactor0

\f1\fs30 \cf0   When a rate increase filing is made pursuant to Section 4, the application is typically suspended and set for hearing by Commission Order.  Once the application is set for hearing, it is processed by the Commission's litigation staff in the Office of Administrative Litigation (OAL).  The issues in the application can be settled if parties can reach consensus.  However, if the issues cannot be resolved, they will proceed to a hearing before an Administrative Law Judge (ALJ).   Whether the case is settled or proceeds to hearing, the Commission will eventually need to act upon the settlement, or upon the record in the hearing.\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
}