{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Maestro-5020590718650455-John Smith-1812\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Maestro-5893797657801247-John Smith-1812\
Maestro-6304992215087907-John Smith-1812\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi720\partightenfactor0

\f1\fs30 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
When a rate increase filing is made pursuant to Section 4, the application is typically suspended and set for hearing by Commission Order.  Once the application is set for hearing, it is processed by the Commission's litigation staff in the Office of Administrative Litigation (OAL).  The issues in the application can be settled if parties can reach consensus.  However, if the issues cannot be resolved, they will proceed to a hearing before an Administrative Law Judge (ALJ).   Whether the case is settled or proceeds to hearing, the Commission will eventually need to act upon the settlement, or upon the record in the hearing.\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi720\partightenfactor0

\f1\fs30 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The Commission also has authority under Section 5 of the NGA to require prospective changes in the rates charged by a pipeline when it can be demonstrated that the rates are no longer just and reasonable.
\fs24 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs22 \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\fs24 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\fs30 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 Additionally, the Commission sets rates for intrastate pipelines under Section 311 of the Natural Gas Policy Act (NGPA).  Under Section 311, intrastate pipelines are permitted to transport gas for interstate pipelines and local distribution companies (LDC) in interstate commerce without becoming subject to jurisdiction under the NGA (intrastate pipelines are regulated by their State Agencies).  The rates established under Section 311 must meet a "fair and equitable" standard, as opposed to a "just and reasonable" standard.  When this Commission sets the rates for Section 311 service, the rates are computed using the same cost-of-service methodology used under the NGA.  However, an intrastate pipeline may elect to use an approved cost-based rate on file with the State agency that regulates its intrastate business.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Finally, there are "limited" Section 4 filings where pipelines file to add a new service and establish new rates, as well as, complaint proceedings that raise rate issues to be addressed by the Commission.\
}