{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker }{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'00;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi720\sl480\slmult1\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Routing No: 042100175\
SSN: 574252142\
As the Committee reviews the current state of pipeline safety and the progress that has been made since the 2002 Act, these are the main points I would like to emphasize:\
\pard\tx360\tx720\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl480\slmult1\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\fs24 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\'95	}
\f0\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
We need to enact pipeline safety reauthorization legislation before the end of this Congress.  A lot of work has gone into the current bills, and there are no major disagreements about what a compromise among the various bills should look like.  Let\'92s get a good bill passed now.\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\fs24 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\'95	}
\f0\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The Pipeline Safety Improvement Act of 2002 is a success.  Industry and DOT have cooperated to achieve significant improvement in pipeline safety, and this improvement is demonstrated by our industry\'92s record.  This record is reflected on the charts that accompany my testimony.\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\fs24 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\'95	}
\f0\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The oil pipeline industry is making the investments needed to fully comply with the law and related regulations and in many cases to exceed their requirements.  We plan to invest over $1 billion in pipeline safety improvements over the next five years.  Because of this, it is very important that Congress reauthorize the DOT pipeline safety program in 2006.  Reauthorization sends a clear signal that these investments are appropriate, and DOT is on the right track in implementing the 2002 Act. \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\fs24 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\'95	}
\f0\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
In addition, several billions of dollars of investments in new oil pipeline infrastructure are underway or planned in the near term.  Certainty in the safety requirements this infrastructure must meet is very important for these investments.\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\fs24 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\'95	}
\f0\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The Administration, the jurisdictional committees of the House and Senate, the industry and the pipeline advocates are in virtual agreement on the core provisions of a compromise reauthorization bill that could be passed in 2006.  Passage of a bill before final congressional adjournment is our shared goal.  \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\fs24 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\'95	}
\f0\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
If this Congress passes a reauthorization bill, the protections provided by this compromise will be available now.  If this Congress fails to pass a bill, a subsequent Congress must start over to adopt new legislation approving the needed authority.  That could take months or years.  Congress can act now and should act now.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi720\sl480\slmult1\partightenfactor0
\cf0 We urge you to act promptly to reconcile any differences between the Senate bill, S. 3961, and the bills approved by the House Committees and send a compromise bill to the President this year. \ul \ulc0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\sl480\slmult1\partightenfactor0
\cf0 The Role of Pipelines in Petroleum Supply\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi720\sl480\slmult1\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \ulnone In discussing pipeline safety legislation, it is useful to remind the Committee of the role oil pipelines play in energy supply.  An understanding of this role leads to appreciation of the need for effective and workable policies that provide certainty so this key part of the petroleum distribution system operates efficiently and safely. \
About 40 percent of the total U.S. energy supply comes from petroleum, but the transportation sector depends on petroleum for 97 percent of its energy.  Two-thirds of domestic crude oil and refined products transportation is provided by pipeline.  Pipelines do this safely and efficiently.  The cost to deliver a gallon of petroleum by pipeline is very low, typically 2-3 cents per gallon.  Transportation \'96 airlines, automobiles, trucks, barges and ships -- could not function without pipelines to deliver crude oil to refineries and refinery output of petroleum fuels to consumers in various parts of the country.  The national oil pipeline system is a bargain for consumers and an absolutely essential part of the US economy.\
}