[Federal Register: August 6, 1999 (Volume 64, Number 151)]
[Proposed Rules]
[Page 42873-42887]
From the Federal Register Online via GPO Access [wais.access.gpo.gov]
[DOCID:fr06au99-27]

SSN - 222-56-1103

DOB 9/17/1973

Email: bowtefab@za.io

=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

Food and Drug Administration

21 CFR Part 314

[Docket No. 85N-0214]


180-Day Generic Drug Exclusivity for Abbreviated New Drug
Applications

AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, HHS.

ACTION: Proposed rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is proposing to amend
its regulations governing 180-day generic drug exclusivity under the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (the act). The proposed rule
clarifies existing eligibility requirements for abbreviated new drug
application (ANDA) sponsors and describes new eligibility requirements.
The proposed changes to the regulations are necessary because of recent
court decisions invalidating portions of FDA's current regulations. The
proposed regulations are intended to permit the prompt entry of generic
drug products into the market while maintaining the incentive of market
exclusivity for generic drug manufacturers.

DATES: Submit written comments by November 4, 1999. Submit written
comments on the information collection requirements by September 7,
1999. See section VIII of this document for the effective date of a
final rule based on this document.

ADDRESSES: Submit written comments to the Dockets Management Branch
(HFA-305), Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, rm. 1061,
Rockville, MD 20852. Submit written comments on the information
collection requirements to the Office of Information and Regulatory
Affairs, OMB, New Executive Office Bldg., 725 17th St. NW., rm. 10235,
Washington, DC 20503, Attn: Desk Officer for FDA.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Virginia G. Beakes, Center for Drug
Evaluation and Research (HFD-7), Food and Drug Administration, 5600
Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857, 301-594-2041.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 I. Background

     The Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act of 1984
(Public Law 98-417) (the Hatch-Waxman Amendments) created section
505(j) of the act (21 U.S.C. 355(j)). Section 505(j) established the
ANDA approval process, which allows a generic version of a previously
approved innovator drug to be approved without submission of a full new
drug application (NDA). An ANDA refers to a previously approved new
drug application (the ``listed drug'') and relies upon the agency's
finding of safety and effectiveness for that drug product.
     Innovator drug applicants must include in an NDA information about
patents for the drug product that is the subject of the NDA. FDA
publishes this patent information as part of the agency's publication
``Approved Drug

[[Page 42874]]

Products with Therapeutic Equivalence Evaluations'' (the Orange Book).
     Generic drug applicants must include in an ANDA a patent
certification described in section 505(j)(2)(A)(vii) of the act for
each patent listed in the Orange Book for the listed drug. The
applicant must certify one of the following for each patent: (1) that
no patent information on the drug product that is the subject of the
ANDA has been submitted to FDA; (2) that such patent has expired; (3)
the date on which such patent expires; or (4) that such patent is
invalid or will not be infringed by the manufacture, use, or sale of
the drug product for which the ANDA is submitted. These certifications
are known as ``paragraph I,'' ``paragraph II,'' ``paragraph III,'' and
``paragraph IV'' certifications, respectively.
     Notice of a paragraph IV certification must be provided to each
owner of the patent (patent owner) that is the subject of the
certification and to the holder of the approved NDA (NDA holder) to
which the ANDA refers. The terms ``patent owner'' and ``NDA holder'' as
used throughout this proposed regulation mean either those parties or
their representatives, including exclusive licensees. The agency
recognizes that different terms are used throughout other sections of
the regulations for the idea expressed in section 505(j)(2)(B)(i)(I)
and (j)(2)(B)(i)(II) of the act that notice must be given to the
principals (patent owner and NDA holder) or their representatives. The
agency has added a definitions section to the proposed regulation to
clarify the meaning of these terms, as well as other terms, as used in
this section.
     The submission of an ANDA for a drug product that is claimed in a
patent is an infringing act if the ANDA product is intended to be
marketed before expiration of the patent. (See 35 U.S.C. 271(e)(2).)
Therefore, the submission of an ANDA with a paragraph IV certification
may be the basis for patent infringement litigation.
     Given this risk of patent infringement litigation, section
505(j)(5)(B)(iv)\1\ of the act provides an incentive for generic drug
applicants to file paragraph IV certifications challenging patents that
may be invalid, unenforceable, or not infringed by the product that is
the subject of the ANDA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Section 505(j)(5)(B)(iv) of the act states that:
     If the application contains a certification described in
subclause (IV) of paragraph (2)(A)(vii) and is for a drug for which
a previous application has been submitted under this subsection
continuing [sic] such a certification, the application shall be made
effective not earlier than one hundred and eighty days after--
    (I) the date the Secretary receives notice from the applicant
under the previous application of the first commercial marketing of
the drug under the previous application, or
     (II) the date of a decision of a court in action described in
clause (iii) holding the patent which is the subject of the
certification to be invalid or not infringed, whichever is earlier.
    Prior to the enactment of the Food and Drug Administration
Modernization Act of 1997 (the Modernization Act), 180-day
exclusivity was described at section 505(j)(4)(B)(iv) of the act.
The Modernization Act added new provisions to section 505(j) that
resulted in a renumbering of the sections.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

     In certain circumstances, the first applicant whose ANDA contains
a paragraph IV certification is protected from competition from
subsequent generic versions of the same drug product for 180 days from
either the date the first applicant's drug product is first
commercially marketed or the date of a final court decision holding the
patent that is the subject of the paragraph IV certification invalid,
unenforceable, or not infringed. This marketing protection is commonly
known as ``180-day exclusivity.''
     In the Federal Register of October 3, 1994 (59 FR 50338), FDA
published the final rule implementing the patent and marketing
exclusivity provisions of the Hatch-Waxman Amendments. Section
314.107(c)(1) (21 CFR 314.107(c)(1)), the regulation implementing
section 505(j)(5)(B)(iv) of the act, provided:
     If an abbreviated new drug application contains a certification
that a relevant patent is invalid, unenforceable, or will not be
infringed and the application is for a generic copy of the same
listed drug for which one or more substantially complete abbreviated
new drug applications were previously submitted containing a
certification that the same patent was invalid, unenforceable, or
would not be infringed and the applicant submitting the first
application has successfully defended against a suit for patent
infringement brought within 45 days of the patent owner's receipt of
notice submitted under Sec. 314.95, approval of the subsequent
abbreviated new drug application will be made effective no sooner
than 180 days from whichever of the following dates is earlier:
     (i) The date the applicant submitting the first application
first commences commercial marketing of its drug product; or
     (ii) The date of a decision of the court holding the relevant
patent invalid, unenforceable, or not infringed.
(Emphasis added)
     FDA's requirements for 180-day exclusivity were successfully
challenged in the courts in Mova Pharmaceutical Corp. v. Shalala, 140
F.3d 1060 (D.C. Cir. 1998), and Granutec, Inc. v. Shalala, No. 97-1873
and No. 97-1874, 1998 U.S. App. LEXIS 6685 (4th Cir. Apr. 3, 1998).
     Following the Mova circuit court decision, on June 1, 1998, the
district court entered an order stating that the successful defense
requirement of Sec. 314.107(c)(1) is invalid and permanently enjoined
FDA from enforcing it. In the Federal Register of July 14, 1998 (63 FR
37890), FDA published a guidance for industry entitled ``180-Day
Generic Drug Exclusivity Under the Hatch-Waxman Amendments to the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act'' (June 1998), describing its
approach to 180-day exclusivity in light of the court decisions. In the
Federal Register of November 5, 1998 (63 FR 59710), the agency
published an interim rule revoking the ``successful defense''
requirement. Since that time the agency has regulated directly from the
statute when making exclusivity decisions on a case-by-case basis.
     The agency is proposing new regulations to address the issues that
have arisen as a result of the Mova and Granutec decisions and to
respond to other matters related to 180-day exclusivity not currently
addressed by the regulations. Consistent with the legislative purpose
of section 505(j)(5)(B)(iv) of the act, the proposed regulations
continue to provide an incentive for challenging a listed patent, while
at the same time preventing prolonged or indefinite delays in the
availability of generic drug products.
     During litigation of the many cases related to 180-day
exclusivity, the parties and courts have recognized the potential for
the 180-day exclusivity process to substantially delay the entry of
competitive generic drug products into the market. This situation can
occur when the marketing of any subsequent generic drug product is
contingent upon the occurrence of an event that is within the first
ANDA applicant's control. Such delays could result, for example, from
the inability of the first ANDA applicant with a paragraph IV
certification to obtain timely approval of its application and begin
commercial marketing of its product.
     Licensing agreements and other arrangements between an innovator
company and the generic drug company who is the first ANDA applicant to
file a paragraph IV certification can be of considerable financial
benefit to the companies involved, but also may contribute to delayed
generic competition by forestalling the beginning, or triggering, of
the 180-day exclusivity period. These arrangements can create almost
insurmountable barriers to the final approval and marketing of generic
drug products that are otherwise ready for final approval. These
barriers thwart a major congressional goal underlying the

[[Page 42875]]

passage of the Hatch-Waxman Amendments.
     In developing the approach described in this proposal, the agency
has been guided by the text of the statute, opinions rendered by courts
that have addressed these issues, and concerns expressed to the agency
in submissions commenting on the June 1998 guidance and November 1998
interim rule. The agency has also been guided by its 15 years of
experience with the 180-day exclusivity provisions. This experience has
provided FDA with valuable information regarding the influence of the
180-day exclusivity provisions on the ANDA approval process and the
marketing of generic drug products.

 II. Description of the Proposed Rule

     This proposed rule would revise Sec. 314.107 to clarify and modify
eligibility requirements for ANDA applicants seeking 180-day marketing
exclusivity for a generic drug product. This new approach is offered in
light of the courts' rejection of the previous requirement that an ANDA
applicant successfully defend against a patent infringement lawsuit
before it is eligible for exclusivity.

 A. 180-Day Exclusivity Eligibility

 1. Only First Applicant is Eligible
     The statutory language describing which applications are eligible
for 180-day generic drug exclusivity is ambiguous. The current
regulation interprets the statute as allowing eligibility for
exclusivity only for the applicant that submits the first substantially
complete ANDA with a paragraph IV certification. Although the agency
has considered alternative interpretations, such as ``rolling
exclusivity'' in which the next-in-line applicant is eligible for
exclusivity should the previous applicant become ineligible, FDA
proposes to maintain the current interpretation. The agency, however,
invites comments related to exclusivity eligibility, both those
supporting this interpretation and those suggesting other
possibilities.
     Under this proposed rule, only the applicant submitting the first
substantially complete ANDA for a listed drug with a paragraph IV
certification to any patent in the Orange Book for the listed drug
(first applicant) would be eligible for exclusivity. A substantially
complete application must contain all of the information required under
section 505(j)(2)(A) of the act and under 21 CFR 314.50 and 314.94.
These requirements include the submission of the results of any
required bioequivalence studies, or, if appropriate, a request for a
waiver of such studies. In order for an ANDA to be considered
substantially complete for purposes of exclusivity, the bioequivalence
studies submitted in the ANDA at the time it is initially submitted
must, upon review by the agency, meet the appropriate standards for
approval. If the applicant must conduct a new bioequivalence study to
obtain approval of the ANDA, the application will not be considered to
be substantially complete and the applicant will not be eligible for
exclusivity. No other applicant with a paragraph IV certification will
be eligible for exclusivity for that drug product. The agency is
adopting this position out of concern that, in the rush to be the first
ANDA with a paragraph IV, applicants will submit the results of the
first completed bioequivalence study, whether or not the results meet
the standards for approval. The bioequivalence study is a crucial
component of the ANDA and conduct of the studies can be time consuming.
In order to prevent the granting of exclusivity on the basis of
submission of an inadequate bioequivalence study, FDA has determined
that to be eligible for exclusivity, the ANDA applicant must submit, as
part of the initial application, a bioequivalence study that meets the
standards for approval.
    To be eligible for exclusivity, an applicant must be the first to
submit ANDA that is both substantially complete and contains a
paragraph IV certification to any listed patent. The first applicant
can be an applicant that submits an ANDA that initially contains a
paragraph III certification, but later amends the certification to a
paragraph IV certification, if at the time of the amendment that
applicant's ANDA is the first substantially complete ANDA to contain a
paragraph IV certification. If the first applicant subsequently
withdraws its application or changes or withdraws its paragraph IV
certification, either voluntarily or as a result of a settlement or
defeat in patent litigation, no ANDA applicant will be eligible for
180-day exclusivity.
     Limiting eligibility for exclusivity to the first applicant to
submit a substantially complete ANDA with a paragraph IV certification
is consistent with the goal of permitting earlier entry into the market
of generic competitor products by encouraging prompt challenges to
innovator patents. Granting exclusivity to a later applicant that
submits a patent challenge, and that only becomes first in line because
another applicant(s) has withdrawn its application or paragraph IV
certification, would further delay the entry into the market of generic
drug products with no countervailing public benefit.
     In addition, if the first applicant submits a new paragraph IV
certification because, for example, it makes a formulation change
requiring a supplement or an amendment to its ANDA, it may no longer be
accorded first applicant status. If there is another applicant with a
paragraph IV certification for the same drug product, the first
applicant will no longer be eligible for 180-day exclusivity. Also, no
other applicant will be eligible for 180-day exclusivity.
     As described in the preamble to the 1994 final rule (59 FR 50338
at 50348), there is one exception to this principle. If the agency
accepted for filing a substantially complete ANDA prior to the NDA
holder's submission of a late (untimely) filed patent, the ANDA
applicant is not required to certify to this patent. However, if the
ANDA applicant amends its ANDA to include a paragraph IV certification
to the untimely filed patent, and the ANDA applicant later withdraws
that paragraph IV certification, the next applicant to file a paragraph
IV certification to the untimely filed patent will be eligible for
exclusivity. The agency believes that in this situation it is
appropriate to grant exclusivity to an applicant who was required to
file a paragraph IV certification because the applicant filed its ANDA
after the NDA holder submitted the patent information.
     If there are multiple patents for the listed drug, the applicant
submitting the first paragraph IV certification to any of the listed
patents will be the only ANDA applicant eligible for exclusivity for
that drug. The agency considered an approach that could have made
multiple applicants eligible for exclusivity based upon the order of
submission of paragraph IV certifications for each patent. Different
ANDA's are most likely to have the first paragraph IV certifications to
different patents when new patents are listed for the innovator drug
after the submission of the first ANDA. Although the statute would
support granting multiple exclusivities, the agency has determined that
such multiple exclusivities for a single drug could further delay the
entry of generic drugs onto the market. For example, if two different
applicants were eligible for exclusivity because each was the first to
file a paragraph IV certification for a different listed patent, and
neither exclusivity could begin to run until first commercial marketing
or a favorable court decision, it is possible that each exclusivity
would block the final

[[Page 42876]]

approval of the other application for a substantial period of time.
Moreover, the large number of patents listed for many drugs, the real
possibility that different ANDA applicants may submit first paragraph
IV certifications for these patents, and the relative ease with which
an applicant now becomes eligible for exclusivity could combine to
create an exclusivity program that is virtually unworkable in its
complexity and which would create even more uncertainty for the
industry.
     If the ANDA applicant submitting the first substantially complete
ANDA with a paragraph IV certification submits paragraph IV
certifications to multiple patents at that time, any of those
certifications will render the applicant eligible for exclusivity. The
first court decision finding one of the patents invalid, not infringed,
or unenforceable will trigger the running of the applicant's
exclusivity.
 2. First Applicant Eligible if Not Sued
     The agency is proposing to amend Sec. 314.107(c)(1) to state that
the first applicant would be eligible for 180 days of market
exclusivity even if the applicant is not sued for patent infringement
by the patent owner or NDA holder. This is consistent with the policy
established in FDA's June 1998 guidance. It is also consistent with the
decision in Purepac v. Friedman, 162 F.3d 1201 (D.C. Cir. 1998), in
which the court noted that section 505(j)(5)(B)(iv) of the act does not
require the first applicant to be sued to be eligible for exclusivity.
     The agency recognizes that neither the Purepac nor the Mova
opinion expressly foreclosed the agency from adopting a requirement
that an applicant be sued, and that in the 1989 proposed rule FDA
considered a ``litigation'' requirement as a prerequisite for
exclusivity eligibility. (See 54 FR 28872 at 28929, July 10, 1989.)
However, in light of the removal of the ``successful defense''
requirement and subsequent reconsideration of the statutory language,
the agency proposes that an applicant would be eligible for 180-day
exclusivity even if it is not sued by a patent owner or NDA holder.
     FDA believes that if the first applicant avoids a lawsuit and the
related 30-month stay of final approval (see section 505(j)(5)(B)(iii)
of the act), for example, by designing around a patent in such a way
that its drug product is clearly noninfringing, then that applicant
should not be denied eligibility for exclusivity. In addition, an ANDA
applicant should not be encouraged to file a frivolous certification
that invites litigation so as to qualify for exclusivity. Permitting an
applicant who avoids a lawsuit to be eligible for exclusivity is
consistent with the statutory language and goal of facilitating prompt
entry of generic drug products into the market.
 3. First Applicant Not Eligible if Sued and Loses Lawsuit
     If the first applicant is sued and loses the patent litigation,
proposed Sec. 314.107(c)(4) would require the applicant to change its
certification from a paragraph IV to a paragraph III. Upon the required
certification change, the applicant would lose any claim to exclusivity
eligibility.
     Nothing in the statute or the regulations supports an award of
exclusivity to an ANDA applicant that loses its lawsuit. In fact, such
an award would run counter to the statutory goal of promoting earlier
entry of generic drug products into the market.
     If the agency were to interpret the statute to permit exclusivity
for an ANDA applicant that lost its patent litigation, a subsequent
applicant that is not sued for patent infringement because it managed
to design around the patent nonetheless would not be able to enter the
market until after patent expiration. The court decision trigger for
the beginning of exclusivity would be unavailable to this subsequent
applicant because it applies only when there has been patent litigation
as a result of the paragraph IV certification and an ANDA applicant has
won.
     Additionally, if the agency permitted exclusivity for an applicant
that lost its litigation and therefore could not market its product,
the innovator might avoid generic competition for the life of its
patent merely by refusing to sue any subsequent ANDA applicant. This
outcome would not be justified by the first applicant's unsuccessful
challenge to the patent.
     The declaratory judgment provision discussed in section II.F of
this document could prevent an innovator company from using this
strategy to completely block ANDA approvals in some cases. However, it
is unreasonable to expect subsequent ANDA applicants to obtain a
declaratory judgment that triggers exclusivity for a first applicant
who has not provided any benefit to the public, merely because the
subsequent applicant wants to avoid being blocked for the life of the
patent.
     If a first applicant that loses its patent suit is not eligible
for exclusivity, generic drug products may be able to enter the market
prior to expiration of the innovator's patent in several situations.
Market entry can occur if a subsequent ANDA applicant with a paragraph
IV certification prevails in its patent litigation, settles its patent
litigation, or is not sued as a result of the paragraph IV
certification.
     The agency recognizes that this approach requires a new
interpretation of Sec. 314.94(a)(12)(viii)(A). That provision states
that when an applicant changes its paragraph certification from a IV to
a III after losing a patent infringement suit, ``the application will
no longer be considered to be one containing a [paragraph IV]
certification.'' Previously the agency had described that regulatory
provision as fulfilling only the ``housekeeping'' function of informing
the agency that the ANDA would not be approved until the patent
expired, and explained that the provision had no implications for
exclusivity eligibility. That interpretation was consistent with the
entire regulatory scheme that was built around the successful defense
requirement.
     The removal of the successful defense requirement has resulted in
a fragmented regulatory framework, forcing the agency to modify not
only the regulatory language in certain parts but also, as in this
case, its interpretation of language that is to remain. Under the new
proposed approach, when a first applicant loses its patent litigation
and changes its certification from a paragraph IV to a paragraph III
under Sec. 314.94(a)(12)(viii)(A), it would not be eligible for
exclusivity. In addition, a voluntary change in patent certification
from a IV to a III as described in Sec. 314.94(a)(12)(viii) also would
have the effect of rendering the first ANDA applicant ineligible for
180-day exclusivity. After the first applicant changed its patent
certification to a III, no applicant would be eligible for exclusivity,
and the agency could approve eligible subsequent applications.
 4. Shared Exclusivity for Multiple ANDA's Filed on the Same Day
     The agency is proposing that all applicants for ANDA's containing
paragraph IV certifications for a particular drug product that are
received on the same day will be eligible for exclusivity if no other
ANDA with a paragraph IV certification for the drug product has been
previously filed. All such applicants would be considered first
applicants. Submission of ANDA's on the same day is most likely to
occur when an innovator's 5-year exclusivity barring FDA acceptance of
ANDA's expires, or when ANDA applicants wish to challenge a patent
listed for an innovator product with 5 years of exclusivity and file
ANDA's at the end of 4 years of exclusivity (see section

[[Page 42877]]

505(j)(5)(D)(ii) of the act). The applicable periods would be 5 1/2
years or 4 1/2 years when pediatric exclusivity has been granted (see
section 505A(a) of the act (21 U.S.C. 355a(a)).
     Under this proposal, the exclusivity period would be shared by all
first applicants. Once the exclusivity period begins, it would run for
all first applicants, protecting the group of first applicants from
competition from later applicants during the 180-day period. The
application of the triggering period, discussed in section II.B.1 of
this document, would remain essentially the same, with a slight
modification. After a triggering event (described in section II.B of
this document) occurred, all eligible first applicants could be
approved and would be eligible to share the 180-day exclusivity. Once
the 180 days of exclusivity has run following the first triggering
event, any ANDA that was not among the group of first applicants also
would be eligible for final approval.
     The agency believes the statutory language supports this approach,
which would protect the incentive created by Congress for ANDA
applicants to challenge patents. Further, this approach is preferable
to alternative approaches. One alternative approach, which the agency
does not propose because it does not preserve the incentive to
challenge patents, would be for the agency to determine that no ANDA
applicant is eligible for 180-day exclusivity if, on the same day, the
agency receives more than one ANDA with a paragraph IV certification
for the same drug product and no other ANDA with a paragraph IV
certification for the drug product has been previously filed.
     Another option is for the agency to attempt to determine which
application it received first on the same day, an inquiry that is
impractical and may result in an arbitrary ordering of applications. It
may not be possible for the agency to determine which application was
received first. If, for example, the agency received more than one
eligible application in the same mail delivery on a particular day, it
would be impossible to determine which application was received first.
If applications were received by various means throughout the day, when
the applications in the pile were retrieved to date-and time-stamp, the
application that the agency received first might be stamped last.
Although theoretically this particular problem could be avoided by
stamping each document at the time of receipt, this solution is
impractical given agency workload and resource constraints.
 5. Patent Expiration and 180-Day Exclusivity
     The agency is clarifying that once the patent for which the first
applicant filed a paragraph IV certification expires, the first
applicant is no longer eligible for exclusivity. When the first
applicant is no longer eligible for exclusivity, FDA may approve all
otherwise eligible ANDA's. FDA regulations at Sec. 314.94(a)(12)(viii)
currently provide that exclusivity cannot extend beyond the term of the
patent.

 B. The Results of the Patent Challenge

     In general, once an ANDA applicant has submitted a paragraph IV
certification and notified the NDA holder and patent owner of the
patent challenge under Sec. 314.95 (21 CFR 314.95), a number of
outcomes are possible including: (1) The NDA holder or patent owner may
sue the ANDA applicant within the 45-day period established by statute
(section 505(j)(5)(B)(iii) of the act) and that suit may be litigated
to final judgment, (2) the parties may reach a settlement either before
or after a patent infringement lawsuit is filed, or (3) the NDA holder
and patent owner may refrain from filing a patent infringement suit.
Which of these events occurs will depend on many factors, including
market considerations and the relative strength of the patent claims.
However, in each of these cases, there is the potential for a
substantial delay in the entry of generic drug products into the
market. The agency is proposing a relatively simple approach to
limiting this delay, one that applies generally to all of the outcomes
described previously.
     Under the current 180-day exclusivity approach, delays in the
approval of competitive generic drug products are the result of delays
in the occurrence of one of the two events (triggering events) that
will trigger the beginning of the 180-day exclusivity period--either
the first commercial marketing of the first applicant's product, or a
decision of a court holding the patent invalid, not infringed, or
unenforceable, whichever is earlier. The courts in the Mova and Purepac
decisions suggested that, to prevent unreasonable delay in the final
approval of subsequent generic drug applications, FDA could require
that a first ANDA applicant bring its product to market--and thus begin
the running of exclusivity--within a prescribed time period. The agency
believes that such a requirement is appropriate.
 1. Triggering Period
     The agency proposes to adopt the approach suggested by the courts
in the Mova and Purepac decisions and set a time limit for the exercise
of exclusivity. The agency is proposing the use of a 180-day
``triggering period,'' during which there must either be a favorable
court decision regarding the patent or the first applicant must begin
commercial marketing of its product. If neither of these events occur
during the triggering period, the first applicant will lose its
eligibility for exclusivity and subsequent ANDA's will be eligible for
immediate approval.
     The term ``triggering period'' is used throughout this proposed
rule to refer to the 180-day period described previously; this is
distinct from the 180-day exclusivity period (see section II.B.4 of
this document) that may follow the triggering period. The term
``trigger'' as used throughout this proposed rule refers to the two
statutory conditions, one of which must be met, for exclusivity to
begin (see section 505(j)(5)(B)(iv) of the act). Those conditions, as
discussed in sections I and II.B of this document, are: (1) A court
decision finding the patent to be invalid, unenforceable, or not
infringed by the ANDA product, and (2) first commercial marketing of
the ANDA product. The term ``triggering event'' in this proposed rule
refers to the occurrence of one of the two statutory triggers.
     In most cases, the triggering period would begin to run on the day
a subsequent ANDA applicant with a paragraph IV certification receives
a tentative approval stating that but for the first applicant's
exclusivity, the subsequent ANDA would receive final approval. In three
instances the triggering period would not begin to run on the date of
the tentative approval.
     First, if the first applicant was sued for patent infringement as
a result of its paragraph IV certification and the litigation is
ongoing, the triggering period would not begin until expiration of the
30-month stay of ANDA approval (see section II.B.3 of this document).
Similarly, if a court issued a preliminary injunction prohibiting the
first applicant from commercially marketing its drug product, the
triggering period would not begin until the injunction expired.
Finally, the triggering period would not begin until expiration of the
statutorily described time period corresponding with any existing
exclusivity periods for the listed drug (see sections 505(j)(5)(D)(ii)
and 505A(a) of the act).
     To determine how a triggering period would work, the agency
reviewed its experience with the 180-day exclusivity provision. In the
past, delays in obtaining a court decision, or delays in the first
applicant gaining approval for

[[Page 42878]]

its ANDA and/or bringing its product to market, have generally become a
matter of concern when at least one subsequent ANDA applicant has
obtained a tentative approval and the only barrier to final approval is
the first applicant's eligibility for 180 days of exclusivity. Every
day after the tentative approval during which the subsequent applicant
can not market its product represents a lost opportunity both for the
subsequent applicant and the consumer. The subsequent applicant can not
benefit from having submitted an ANDA that meets the requirements of
section 505(j) of the act, and the consumer does not have access to one
or more lower cost generic products.
     Where the first ANDA applicant is eligible for exclusivity and
only that eligibility is blocking final approval of a subsequent ANDA,
it is appropriate to begin the triggering period on the day that a
subsequent applicant has received tentative approval for its ANDA. This
is the first day that the absence of a generic drug product from the
market is directly linked to the first applicant's eligibility for
exclusivity.
     a.  Length of triggering period. The agency is proposing that the
triggering period be 180 days. As described previously, the 180-day
period would follow one of the following: (1) The tentative approval of
a subsequent ANDA with a paragraph IV certification for the same drug
product, (2) expiration of a 30-month stay of ANDA approval due to
patent litigation, (3) expiration of a preliminary injunction
prohibiting marketing of an ANDA product, or (4) expiration of the
statutorily described exclusivity periods for the listed drug.
     Once the triggering period begins, the ANDA applicant eligible for
exclusivity would have 180 days to trigger its exclusivity. This may be
done by beginning commercial marketing of its drug product or obtaining
a favorable court decision (in its own or other litigation regarding
the same patent). Once triggered, the ANDA applicant's exclusivity
would then run for 180 days. If, within the 180-day triggering period,
the beginning of exclusivity was not triggered, the first applicant
would no longer be eligible for exclusivity and the agency could
approve subsequent ANDA's at the end of the triggering period.
     It is possible that there could be no generic drug product
marketed during the triggering period if the first applicant does not
begin commercial marketing of its product. In this case, at least one
generic drug product--the product that had received the tentative
approval--would receive final approval upon expiration of the
triggering period and could begin marketing.
     b.  Basis for length of triggering period. The 180-day length of
the triggering period is derived from the statutory provision governing
180 days of exclusivity. This provision quite clearly allows (and
Congress, therefore, presumably contemplated) the possibility of a 180-
day period during which there is no generic drug product on the market.
This would occur when the running of the 180-day period of exclusivity
has begun with a court decision finding the patent invalid,
unenforceable, or not infringed, but the applicant that has the
exclusivity does not begin marketing its product because it is not
approved or for another reason.
     There is no statutory requirement that the running of the
exclusivity triggered by the court decision described in section
505(j)(5)(B)(iv)(II) of the act be accompanied by the commercial
availability of the generic drug product. Even if no generic drug
product is being marketed, the statute prohibits the agency from
approving another ANDA until the 180-day exclusivity period has
elapsed. After that period, however, the statute permits the approval
of any otherwise eligible ANDA, even if the first applicant never
marketed its product. It is therefore reasonable to assume that
Congress thought that a 180-day period during which no generic drug
product is marketed was acceptable.
     At the same time, there is no indication that Congress would
countenance an indefinite delay in the marketing of low cost generic
drug products once the legal barriers to their approval have been
removed. To the contrary, such a scenario directly conflicts with the
goals of the Hatch-Waxman Amendments. Therefore, the agency is
proposing a 180-day triggering period during which a triggering event
must occur to commence the eligible ANDA applicant's period of
exclusivity.
     The agency recognizes that in very rare cases there could be a
time period longer than 180 days during which no generic drug product
is available. This may happen if, for example, a court decision
triggering the exclusivity period is issued at the end of the 180-day
triggering period, and the first applicant does not market its product
or waive its right to exclusivity during the resulting 180-day
exclusivity period. In the extreme case, this scenario could result in
the inability of a subsequent ANDA applicant to market its product for
a 360-day period (180-day triggering period plus 180-day exclusivity
period) after its tentative approval.
     The agency believes, however, that a first applicant that is
unable to market its own product at the time a subsequent ANDA
applicant receives a tentative approval would ordinarily waive its
exclusivity (see section II.H of this document). This would permit
final approval of the subsequent ANDA. Moreover, in contrast to the
current regulatory structure, under which generic drugs may face almost
insurmountable barriers to market entry, the proposed approach provides
for much earlier market entry. Under the triggering period approach,
there is certainty that one or more generic drug products will be able
to enter the market after the 12-month period described previously, and
in most cases, much more promptly.
 2. Alternative Length of Triggering Period in Specific Cases
     The agency is also specifically seeking comment on an alternative
approach. The agency is considering shortening the length of the
triggering period to 60 days in some cases. The 60-day triggering
period would apply to an ANDA applicant that already has received final
approval at the time of the tentative approval of a subsequent ANDA,
and either has not been sued as a result of its patent certification,
or has been sued and the case was settled or dismissed without a
decision on the merits of the patent claim. The possible 60-day
triggering period in this case is based upon limited data from a July
1998 Congressional Budget Office study entitled ``How Increased
Competition from Generic Drugs Has Affected Prices and Returns in the
Pharmaceutical Industry,'' and a March 1999 internal FDA study
(available in Docket No. 85N-0214).
     FDA does not consider this 60-day timeframe to be burdensome to
ANDA applicants because the data suggest that, since passage of the
Hatch-Waxman Amendments, first generic drug products generally reach
the market promptly after approval. Specifically, the studies indicate
that generic products are routinely marketed within a 2-month period
following ANDA approval.
 3. Relationship of Triggering Period to 30-Month Stay
     When the first applicant to submit an ANDA with a paragraph IV
certification is sued by the NDA holder or patent owner, it would be
unreasonable to start the triggering period with the tentative approval
of a subsequent applicant if the tentative approval was granted
relatively soon after the first applicant's patent litigation began.
The first

[[Page 42879]]

applicant could find it difficult or impossible to either obtain a
final court decision in a patent infringement case or begin commercial
marketing of its product within 180 days of the subsequent applicant's
tentative approval. The first applicant who is sued for patent
infringement is, however, provided with a statutory time period, as
discussed in the following paragraphs of this document, during which to
resolve the patent litigation before the triggering period will begin.
     The generic drug product approval process described in the Hatch-
Waxman Amendments establishes a 30-month period for resolution of
patent litigation resulting from a patent certification. (See section
505(j)(B)(5)(iii) of the act.) During this period, FDA may not approve
the ANDA that is the subject of the litigation. After the 30-month
period, barring a court order, FDA may grant final approval to the ANDA
that is the subject of the litigation. Therefore, the agency is
proposing that when the first ANDA applicant is sued as a result of its
paragraph IV certification and the patent litigation is ongoing, the
triggering period would not begin at least until the 30-month period
has lapsed. After the 30 months has passed, the triggering period would
begin when a subsequent applicant received a tentative approval. If a
subsequent applicant received a tentative approval during the 30-month
stay, the 180-day triggering period would begin on the day the 30-month
period expired. The first applicant then would have to begin marketing
its product, or obtain a final court decision, during the 180-day
triggering period to obtain its exclusivity.
 4. Distinction Between Triggering Period and Exclusivity Period
     Although the triggering period would not begin until expiration of
the first applicant's 30-month stay, it is still possible for the
exclusivity period to begin during that 30-month period. If, for
example, a court issues a favorable final decision in litigation over a
subsequent ANDA's patent challenge during the 30-month stay of the
first applicant, the exclusivity period for the first applicant would
start on the date of that decision.
     In proposing this interpretation of the statute--that the
triggering period does not begin until expiration of the 30-month
stay--the agency is aware that in some cases patent litigation
resulting from a paragraph IV certification does not result in a final
court decision within 30 months. The agency is also aware that parties
to patent litigation in some cases may not have strong incentives to
resolve the litigation as promptly as possible. This proposed approach
may alter those incentives and encourage swifter resolution of
litigation.
     Although the agency is proposing that the general rule will be
that the first ANDA applicant has 30 months in which to resolve its
patent litigation before the triggering period may start, the agency
also would allow for a reasonable extension of this period under
certain circumstances. This would occur when the court hearing the
patent infringement case issues a preliminary injunction prohibiting
the marketing of the drug product that is the subject of the challenged
ANDA until there is a court decision finding the patent invalid, not
infringed, or unenforceable. The issuance of such an order is
contemplated in section 505(j)(5)(B)(iii)(III) of the act.
     FDA expects that an injunction would issue upon a finding that it
is warranted by the facts and law in the particular case, and that the
parties have reasonably cooperated in expediting the action. In the
event the court issues an injunction prohibiting the marketing of the
drug product under the first ANDA, the triggering period would not
begin at least until the injunction expires or is lifted by the court.
If the 30-month stay is shortened or lengthened by the court because
either party has failed to reasonably cooperate, the triggering period
will begin with reference to the date ordered by the court.
     While the triggering and exclusivity periods are related, they are
also distinct. The exclusivity period starts with either first
commercial marketing of the first applicant's generic drug product or
with a court decision finding the patent invalid, unenforceable, or not
infringed. The triggering period, in contrast, would be tied to the
date of a subsequent ANDA's tentative approval, and in some cases to
the completion of a 30-month stay. The triggering period may not result
in an exclusivity period for the first applicant if no triggering event
occurs during the triggering period. In contrast, an exclusivity period
may begin independent of any triggering period, if no subsequent ANDA
is given a tentative approval to begin the triggering period.
Alternatively, the exclusivity period could begin during the triggering
period.

 C. A Decision of a Court

     FDA's current regulations state that for purposes of applying the
ANDA approval and exclusivity provisions of the statute, ``the court''
is the court that enters final judgment from which no appeal can be or
has been taken (district or appellate court) (Sec. 314.107(e)). This
interpretation was challenged in TorPharm v. Shalala, No. 97-1925, U.S.
Dist. LEXIS 21983 (D.D.C. Sep. 15, 1997); appeal withdrawn and
remanded, 1998 U.S. App. LEXIS 4681 (D.C. Cir. Feb. 5, 1998); vacated
No. 97-1925 (D.D.C. April 9, 1998).
     Plaintiffs in that case maintained that ``the court'' meant the
district court and that final approval could be granted and exclusivity
begin running upon the entry of a district court decision finding a
patent invalid, unenforceable, or not infringed. Because the district
court decision in TorPharm agreeing with plaintiffs was vacated (set
aside or rendered void), the agency will not address it further in this
proposed rule. FDA instead proposes to maintain its current
interpretation. The agency believes this interpretation is most
consistent with the statutory scheme.
     The agency is also proposing that the decision of a court that may
begin the running of exclusivity is the final decision of a court
hearing any litigation involving the patent at issue. Current
Sec. 314.107(c)(1)(ii) states that one of the two exclusivity triggers
is the ``date of the decision of the court holding the relevant patent
invalid, unenforceable, or not infringed.'' FDA proposes to modify
Sec. 314.107(c)(1)(ii) to read the ``date of the decision of a court *
* *.''
     This modification is consistent with the statutory language in
section 505(j)(5)(B)(iv) of the act. The agency is clarifying that for
purposes of both the modified regulatory provision and section
505(j)(5)(B)(iv)(II) of the act, `` a decision of a court in an action
described in [section 505(j)(5)(B)(iii) of the act] holding the patent
which is the subject of the certification to be invalid or not
infringed'' can be a decision of any court hearing a patent
infringement or declaratory judgment case involving the patent at
issue. The decision triggering exclusivity need not come from the court
hearing the patent litigation involving the first ANDA. (See also
Granutec, Inc. v. Shalala, 1998 U.S. App. LEXIS 6685, Nos. 97-1873, 97-
1874, slip op. at 14-18 (4th Cir. Apr. 3, 1998) (unpublished opinion
discussing the agency's interpretation of ``a'' court decision).)
     The use of different language in subsections (I) and (II) of
section 505(j)(5)(B)(iv) of the act supports this interpretation. In
subsection (I), the statutory trigger is specifically tied to the date
that ``the applicant under the previous application'' gives notice that
its product is being commercially marketed. In contrast, the trigger in
subsection (II) relates only to the date of ``a decision of a court''
in patent

[[Page 42880]]

litigation described in section 505(j)(5)(B)(iii) of the act.
     The language of the first trigger refers to a particular
applicant. In contrast, the language of the second trigger does not
attach importance to the specific applicant. It instead refers
generally to a type of court decision. In the absence of specific,
controlling language to the contrary, the agency continues to interpret
``a decision of a court'' in subsection (II) to mean a decision of any
court hearing a patent infringement or declaratory judgment case
involving the patent at issue.
     This interpretation of the court decision trigger encourages
prompt litigation of patent issues by all ANDA applicants, and under
some circumstances could result in a corresponding earlier start of the
180-day exclusivity period. This could result in situations where,
although the first applicant was sued first, its litigation is not
completed first, and its exclusivity begins to run while it is still in
litigation.
     The agency is aware that in some instances the first applicant may
be unable or unwilling to market its product upon satisfaction of the
court decision trigger involving another applicant. For example, the
first applicant's own patent litigation may be ongoing and its ANDA may
have been finally approved at the completion of a 30-month stay under
section 505(j)(5)(B)(iii) of the act. However, the applicant may be
unwilling to assume the risk of liability for damages by marketing
before patent expiration or a court decision finding the applicant's
product does not infringe the patent. The agency notes, however, that
in such a situation the first applicant may obtain a financial benefit
from the award of exclusivity by waiving its exclusivity with respect
to a subsequent applicant (see section II.H of this document).
     A contrary interpretation that required the court decision be a
decision in patent litigation against the first applicant could, under
some circumstances, delay entry into the market of drug products by all
ANDA applicants. For example, the patent owner or NDA holder may elect
not to sue the first ANDA applicant, in which case the court decision
trigger would never apply to that applicant's patent challenge, and
exclusivity could therefore begin running only with the first
applicant's commencement of commercial marketing. If the first
applicant's marketing is delayed because it cannot obtain final
approval of its ANDA or, having obtained final approval, the first
applicant either cannot or will not bring its product to market, there
could be a substantial delay in marketing of any generic drug product.
This delay would result even if a subsequent applicant is successful in
challenging the patent, either in a lawsuit brought by the innovator or
in a declaratory judgment action.
     As described in section II.B.3 of this document, under the
approach proposed in this rule, the triggering period would not apply
when a subsequent applicant obtains a court decision that begins the
period of exclusivity. In such cases the first applicant's exclusivity
would begin to run on the date of the final court decision in the
subsequent applicant's litigation. The triggering period applies only
when a subsequent applicant has obtained a tentative approval where
final approval is blocked by the first ANDA applicant's eligibility for
exclusivity. Under these circumstances, the subsequent applicant would
have been eligible for final approval because either: (1) It wasn't
sued by the innovator, (2) it was sued but the litigation was settled
or dismissed without a favorable court decision, or (3) it was sued and
the 30-month stay had elapsed.

